Autoresearch for Marketplace Catalogs:
From Legacy Forms to AI-Native Matching
Kartik Ravisankar

Hojat Abdolanezhad

Daniel Capo

kravisankar@thumbtack.com
Thumbtack
San Francisco, CA, USA

habdolanezhad@thumbtack.com
Thumbtack
San Francisco, CA, USA

dcapo@thumbtack.com
Thumbtack
San Francisco, CA, USA

Sang Su Lee

Shishir Dash

Vijay Anand Raghavan

psulee@thumbtack.com
Thumbtack
San Francisco, CA, USA

shishirdash@thumbtack.com
Thumbtack
San Francisco, CA, USA

vraghavan@thumbtack.com
Thumbtack
San Francisco, CA, USA

Abstract

Keywords

Two-sided service marketplaces that match consumers to service
providers are transitioning from deterministic request-form intake to an AI-native probabilistic matching system, enabled by
recent advances in large language models (LLMs) that can infer
user intent, contextual preferences, and latent constraints from
natural language instructions. As marketplaces increasingly rely
on inferred intent rather than fixed-form fields, these platforms
must regenerate the provider-side preference taxonomy that underwrites matching, search, and pricing: a set of provider attributes
and preferences interpretable to service providers while remaining useful signals for marketplace decision-making. We present an
autoresearch loop that generates this taxonomy one occupation
at a time. The system has been deployed in production at a major
U.S. consumer services marketplace since April 2026 across 132
occupations. Instead of constructing a single global hierarchy, the
loop treats each occupation as an independent generation problem
and runs iterative propose-evaluate-keep refinement cycles. Each
candidate tag set is scored using a recalibrated six-rubric LLMas-judge framework, producing a composite score of up to 15. A
7-critic panel, each with distinct personas, contributes weighted
penalties to produce an adjusted score, with no hard vetoes. A separate LLM-based parity-mapping stage maps legacy request-form
Q&A pairs back to the generated taxonomy, producing both a coverage signal and a scalable interface for human quality assurance.
The loop migrates legacy structured Q&A by first inferring the
underlying provider attribute that each question was intended to
measure, rather than performing literal question-to-tag translation.
Unlike prior autonomous taxonomy-generation systems, our approach (i) takes the per-occupation preference-tag catalog (not the
hierarchy of occupations) as the unit of optimization, (ii) generates
each occupation’s tags independently in parallel, (iii) evaluates with
marketplace-grounded critics contributing weighted penalties (no
hard vetoes) to an adjusted score, and (iv) treats legacy-Q&A-tomodern-tag migration as a distinct pipeline component rather than
a downstream side effect. We report deployment results from a
14-day post-launch production cohort (1,840 enrolled pros, 9.3M
filter evaluations) that surfaces a concrete catalog-hygiene gap that
a global-build approach would have masked.

LLM autoresearch, taxonomy generation, marketplace catalog, multicritic evaluation, LLM-as-judge, deployed system

1

Introduction

A marketplace catalog provides the shared representation through
which consumer requests, provider preferences, and job attributes
are interpreted. Matching, search, and pricing all depend on this
common language. However, in service marketplaces that have historically relied on structured question-and-answer (Q&A) forms, the
catalog is often implicit, distributed across hundreds of categoryspecific schemas rather than represented as a unified structure.
When the marketplace transitions to AI-native probabilistic matching (Figure 1), this implicit catalog becomes a liability. Matching
models require structured signals, pricing models require job attributes that transfer across categories, and marketplace participants need a coherent interface for expressing preferences without
navigating hundreds of independent schemas.
We frame this problem as a catalog reconstruction, not creation,
since the catalog is already implicitly defined in the legacy system,
albeit distributed, through Q&A pairs. The task is to infer the latent
attributes encoded across Q&A pairs and reorganize them into an
explicit representation suitable for AI-native marketplace interactions. Because the implicit legacy catalog is organized around
distinct service domains, each with its own vocabulary, preference
structure, and matching semantics, we decompose catalog reconstruction into a collection of smaller autoresearch problems [8]
rather than a single global taxonomy-generation task. This design
contrasts with recent hierarchical taxonomy-generation systems,
which optimize coherent occupation hierarchies [9] or corpus-level
research taxonomies [7]. Our goal is not to build a single hierarchy over all domains, but to reconstruct preference catalogs whose
semantics remain meaningful within each service domain in a twosided marketplace.
The key contributions of this paper are as follows:
(1) Catalogs for marketplaces - We study a catalog- reconstruction problem distinct from occupation-hierarchy construction [9], text-label taxonomy induction [12], researchcorpus taxonomy adaptation [7], and product-schema modeling [5]. The generated unit is a provider-facing preference
tag: a primitive that providers toggle with in production and
that the downstream marketplace systems use.

KDD2026 Workshop, August 2026, Jeju, Korea

Kartik Ravisankar, Hojat Abdolanezhad, Daniel Capo, Sang Su Lee, Shishir Dash, and Vijay Anand Raghavan

(a) Legacy Q&A matching

(b) AI-native matching

Figure 1: Evolution from legacy request-form matching to AI-native matching: Legacy matching (a) relies on an implicit catalog
embedded in occupation-specific Q&A forms. AI-native matching (b) requires an explicit catalog that translates consumer
intent and provider preferences into a shared representation for downstream marketplace systems.
(2) Independent autoresearch loops - We decompose reconstruction into independent autoresearch jobs, one per service
occupation, each with its own propose-evaluate-keep loop.
This avoids forcing all service domains into a single global
hierarchy and limits semantic interference between occupations with superficially similar but operationally distinct
attributes.
(3) Marketplace-grounded automated evaluation - We combine a recalibrated multi-rubric LLM-as-judge [14] with a
seven-persona critic panel that contributes weighted penalties to the generated catalog. This aligns evaluation with
marketplace objectives rather than generic measures of taxonomy quality.
(4) Legacy Q&A parity mapping - We introduce a paritymapping stage that maps the reconstructed catalog back to
legacy request-form Q&A pairs. This stage measures whether
the new catalog covers the operational distinctions encoded
in the legacy system and produces a human-reviewable
artifact for validating migration from structured forms to
provider-preference tags.
Success for this system means the marketplace can retire its
legacy request forms without losing the preference structure they
encoded. The most direct evidence is reconstruction fidelity. Across
the reconstructed catalog, 73.3% of legacy answers map directly to
a tag in the regenerated catalog; most of the remainder are intakeonly answers (sizes, ranges, “flexible”) that a preference schema
should not carry, excluded as acceptable non-tags (20.8% of all
answers). Only 6.0% of legacy answers are regrettable misses, real

preferences left uncovered. Measured against the preferences that
should map, pooled coverage is 92.5%, the per-occupation median
is 100% (mean 97.8%). What the catalog drops is, by construction,
intake detail; the screening preferences pros act on are almost
entirely preserved. Together with production scale (132 occupations
live, new ones onboarded on demand within hours) and mandatory
human sign-off before deployment, this fidelity is what makes
retiring the request forms defensible.
The propose-evaluate-keep loop builds on prior work in iterative LLM refinement, principle-guided critique, and autoresearch
systems [2, 8, 10]; here, we operationalize it for production catalog
reconstruction in a two-sided service marketplace. We report results
from a production deployment spanning 132 service occupations
as of April 2026, with on-demand onboarding of new occupations
as the marketplace expands. The remainder of the paper describes
the marketplace setting (§2), other related works (§3), the autoresearch system used for catalog reconstruction (§4), its deployment
in production (§5), and the empirical findings (§6) that emerge from
operating the system at scale.

2

Background

In this section, we describe the marketplace setting and the production context in which the system is deployed (§2.1), as well as
the terminology needed to understand the catalog-reconstruction
problem (§2.2).

Autoresearch for Marketplace Catalogs:
From Legacy Forms to AI-Native Matching

2.1

Marketplace context

The deploying organization is a major U.S. online services marketplace that connects consumers with local service professionals (pros)
across home, wellness, and event categories, including plumbing,
house cleaning, photography, landscaping, and roughly 130 others.
Pros specify targeting preferences that determine which consumer
leads they are eligible to receive and purchase. The system described
in this paper is part of a 2026 pro-side marketplace redesign that
replaces rigid binary targeting defined through structured Q&A
with probabilistic matching driven by a structured provider-side
preference taxonomy [4].

2.2

Terminology

The legacy taxonomy is organized as a hierarchy of occupations,
categories, and category-specific request-form Q&A schemas. The
reconstructed catalog contains two tag classes.
(1) Canonical tags determine eligibility: a provider must possess
the canonical tag associated with a category for the strictmatch filter to consider that provider eligible for leads in
that category;
(2) Specialty preference tags allow providers to refine which leads
they wish to receive within categories for which they are
already eligible
Section 6 reports two production findings that depend on this distinction: a catalog-hygiene gap in which deprecated canonical tags
were still emitted by request-time enrichment, and a deploymentside seeding gap in which 40.66% of filter evaluations failed because the canonical tag associated with the consumer request was
not present on the provider profile. A filter evaluation is a single
matchmaker-side check, for one candidate pro and one incoming
consumer request, to determine whether the pro’s profile contains
the request’s required canonical tag.

3

Related Work

Our work sits at the intersection of automated taxonomy construction, agentic schema generation, autoresearch systems, prompt
optimization, and LLM-based evaluation.
Hierarchical taxonomy construction. CLIMB [9] built occupation
hierarchies using a global semantic clustering to distill core occupations, followed by a reflection-based multi-agent system to
iteratively build a coherent hierarchy. Our work differs in both
the unit of generation and the reconstruction objective: CLIMB
generated occupations within a hierarchy, whereas we reconstruct
provider-preference tags within an occupation. Furthermore, our
catalogs are generated independently for each occupation and must
support migration from legacy request-form Q&A systems through
parity mapping. TnT-LLM [12] used LLMs to induce and iteratively
refine label taxonomies from unstructured text, while TaxoAdapt [7]
dynamically adapted multidimensional taxonomies to evolving scientific corpora through iterative hierarchical classification. Both
systems inform the generation-and-refinement paradigm we adopt.
However, their objective is taxonomy induction for corpus organization and classification, whereas ours is catalog reconstruction for
marketplace decision-making.

KDD2026 Workshop, August 2026, Jeju, Korea

Schema and catalog generation. AttributeForge [5] automated
end-to-end product-schema modeling using a large collection of
specialized LLM agents, together with automated evaluation and repair. It is the closest prior work to ours in terms of production-scale
catalog reconstruction. The key distinction is the object being modeled: AttributeForge generated product attributes for e-commerce
catalogs, whereas we reconstruct provider-preference catalogs for
service marketplaces, where matching depends on both provider
capabilities and provider screening preferences.
Autoresearch, self-refinement, and prompt optimization. Our "propose, evaluate, keep" loop draws on a broader family of iterative LLM optimization methods, including Self-Refine [10], Constitutional AI [2], multi-agent debate [3], GEPA [1], and promptoptimization frameworks such as DSPy and MIPROv2 [11]. Like
DSPy, we treat prompts as optimizable artifacts and evaluation as
the search signal. However, rather than optimizing a single prompt
against a fixed benchmark or held-out metric, our framework optimizes occupation-specific catalog-generation prompts whose outputs are structured marketplace catalogs.
LLM-based evaluation and abstraction. Our system draws on
recent work in both LLM-based evaluation and abstraction. The
six-rubric evaluation framework builds on LLM-as-judge methodologies [14] and critique-based evaluation [6], adapting them to
catalog reconstruction through marketplace-specific criteria derived from production review. Several rubrics were introduced to
capture failure modes that generic taxonomy metrics overlook, such
as tags that are semantically coherent but insufficiently specific
or interpretable for provider-facing use. We also draw inspiration
from Step-Back Prompting [13]. Rather than translating legacy
request-form questions directly into tags, we first infer the underlying job attribute each question was intended to capture and use
that abstraction as input to catalog generation.

4

System Design

We formulate catalog reconstruction as an iterative propose-evaluatekeep problem (§4.1). Candidate catalogs are generated independently for each service domain, evaluated using a rubric-based LLM
judge (§4.2), adjusted through a multi-persona critic panel (§4.4),
and validated against legacy request-form semantics through parity
mapping (§4.6).

4.1

Per-Occupation Autoresearch Loop

Catalog reconstruction is a cold-start problem: initially there is
no per-occupation generation prompt, so every occupation 𝑜 ∈ 𝑂
(|𝑂 | = 132 in the current production deployment) is seeded with
the same baseline prompt 𝑝 (0) , i.e. 𝑝𝑜★ ←𝑝 (0) . We run Algorithm 1
(illustrated in Figure 2) independently per occupation.
At iteration 0, the generator G applies the baseline prompt to the
occupation’s legacy data 𝐷𝑜 ( RF Q&A schema for each category,
% share of recently-active pros who have currently enrolled a (q,
a) pair as a preference) to produce a candidate tag set 𝑇 . The sixrubric LLM-as-judge scores the set, 𝑠 = E (𝑇 ) ∈ [0, 15], and the
seven-persona critic panel adds weighted penalties 𝜋𝑘 , giving the
Í
composite score 𝑎 = 𝑠 − 𝑘 𝑤𝑘 𝜋𝑘 (𝑇 ). This becomes the initial
best (𝑝𝑜★,𝑇 ★, 𝑠 ★, 𝑎★). The loop runs a cross-family model stack: the

KDD2026 Workshop, August 2026, Jeju, Korea

Kartik Ravisankar, Hojat Abdolanezhad, Daniel Capo, Sang Su Lee, Shishir Dash, and Vijay Anand Raghavan

Legacy RF data 𝐷𝑜

Generator

Judge (score /15)

7-persona critic
panel (parallel)
PM

Pro

Taxonomy

Adversarial

Reasoning

Coherence

Parity

Aggregate penalties
(set-level + critic)

Editor:
revise prompt

iterate

Algorithm 1 Occupation-Local Autoresearch
Require: legacy data 𝐷𝑜 with RF Q&A 𝑄𝑜 , shared seed prompt
𝑝 (0) , budget 𝐵, critic weights 𝑤
Ensure: best prompt 𝑝𝑜★, best catalog 𝑇 ★, parity relation 𝑀 ★, unmapped sets 𝑈𝑄★, 𝑈𝑇★
1: 𝑝𝑜★ ← 𝑝 (0) ,
𝑇 ★ ← G(𝑝𝑜★, 𝐷𝑜 ), 𝑎★ ← E (𝑇 ★) − 𝜌 (𝑇 ★) −
Í
★
𝑘 𝑤 𝑘 𝜋𝑘 (𝑇 )
2: for 𝑡 = 1 to 𝐵 do
3:
𝑝𝑜 ← R (𝑝𝑜★), 𝑇 ← G(𝑝𝑜 , 𝐷𝑜 ), 𝑎ˆ ← E (𝑇 ) − 𝜌 (𝑇 )
⊲
pre-critic score; 𝜌 = set-level penalty (parity coverage + proliferation)
4:
if 𝑎ˆ > 𝑎★ then
⊲ 𝑎ˆ ≥ 𝑎, so a candidate with 𝑎ˆ ≤ 𝑎★
provably cannot win; skip critics
Í
5:
𝑎 ← 𝑎ˆ − 𝑘 𝑤𝑘 𝜋𝑘 (𝑇 )
6:
if 𝑎 > 𝑎★ then
7:
(𝑝𝑜★,𝑇 ★, 𝑎★) ← (𝑝𝑜 ,𝑇 , 𝑎)
8:
end if
9:
end if
10: end for
11: 𝑀 ★ ← P (𝑇 ★, 𝑄𝑜 ) ⊆ 𝑇 ★ × 𝑄𝑜
⊲ many-to-many tag ↔ Q&A
relation
★ ← 𝑄 \ 𝜋 (𝑀 ★ )
12: 𝑈𝑄
⊲ unmapped Q&A
𝑜
𝑄
13: 𝑈𝑇★ ← 𝑇 ★ \ 𝜋𝑇 (𝑀 ★ )
⊲ tags with no covering Q&A
★, 𝑈 ★ )
14: return (𝑝𝑜★,𝑇 ★, 𝑀 ★, 𝑈𝑄
𝑇

Improved?
on plateau

Best catalog 𝑇 ★

Parity mapping
(tags ↔ RF Q&A)
coverage + human QA

Figure 2: Per-occupation autoresearch loop (conceptual
overview; see Algorithm 1 for the precise procedure). The occupation’s legacy RF data 𝐷𝑜 and current best prompt 𝑝𝑜 feed
a Generator that produces a candidate tag set. Each candidate
is scored by the E six-rubric LLM-as-judge; the seven-persona
critic panel then runs in parallel, and its feedback is aggregated. The gate decides whether the editor’s single proposed
prompt edit improves on the current best and is kept. On a
plateau or budget exhaustion, the best catalog 𝑇 ★ is handed
to the post-loop parity mapping, which links catalog tags to
legacy RF Q&A (many-to-many) and produces the artifact
humans review.

generator G and judge E on one family (GPT-5-4 / GPT-5-4-mini),
the seven critics, editor, and parity mapper on another (Claude
Sonnet 4.6), so the models that propose and score do not share
biases with the models that critique and mutate (§4.2, §7).
Each subsequent iteration proposes and tests a single prompt edit.
The editor R makes one targeted change to the current best prompt
𝑝𝑜★, focused on a single weak quality dimension: it ranks the six

E rubrics together with an injected parity-coverage dimension by
mean score and selects the lowest-scoring dimension not targeted in
the previous two iterations, avoiding fixation on any one rubric. The
editor conditions on the weakest tag examples in that dimension,
the score trends across iterations, and the log of previously accepted
and rejected edits. The revised prompt is regenerated and rescored;
as a per-iteration cost saver, the critic panel is invoked only when
the candidate’s E score is not already below the best (𝑠 ≥ 𝑠 ★), since a
lower-E candidate is very unlikely to overcome the best composite
score. The edit is accepted, thus becoming the new best, iff its
composite score improves, 𝑎 > 𝑎★; otherwise the prompt reverts
to 𝑝𝑜★. The loop runs for a fixed budget of 𝐵 iterations (default
5). Appendix B traces one iteration end-to-end on the Accounting
occupation.
On termination, the parity mapping P (𝑇 ★, 𝑄𝑜 ) links the tags of
the best catalog 𝑇 ★ to the legacy RF Q&A 𝑄𝑜 as a many-to-many
relation 𝑀 ★ ⊆ 𝑇 ★ × 𝑄𝑜 , leaving residual sets 𝑈𝑄★ (RF Q&A covered
by no tag—typically intake-specific size/range/flexibility questions)
and 𝑈𝑇★ (tags covered by no Q&A). We emit 𝑀 ★ as a JSON mapping
and a Google Sheet for human review before deployment.

4.2

Six-Rubric LLM-as-Judge

The judge model E scores every tag (𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 ) on six dimensions:
• Screening vs. Intake (0–3): Does the tag describe a job
type the pro might want more or less of (good), or is it a
customer-intake detail the pro should not screen on (bad)?
E.g. “Tax return preparation” (screening) vs. “Travel range:
15 miles” (intake).

Autoresearch for Marketplace Catalogs:
From Legacy Forms to AI-Native Matching

• Tag Legibility (0–3): Would a working pro understand this
tag from the tag text alone? E.g. “Appliance repair” (clear)
vs. the bare noun “Appliances”
• Preference Variance (0–3): Do real pros split on this tag,
or is everyone equally for-or-against (degenerate)? E.g. Accounting pros split on “QuickBooks” proficiency, but nearly
all accountants serve the “healthcare industry” (degenerate).
• Cross-Category Consistency (0–2): When the same jobattribute appears in two categories within the occupation, do
the tags match? E.g. the client-entity type tagged identically
as “S-Corp” wherever it recurs across the occupation’s categories, not “S-Corp” in one and “S-Corporation” in another.
• Canonical Coverage (0 or 2): Does every category in the
occupation have a canonical tag covering it? E.g. “Payroll
services” tag cleanly covers the Payroll Services category,
whereas a tag backed by no category scores 0
• Information Loss (0–2): Are the tag’s sources traceable
to specific legacy Q&A answers, i.e. does it cite the legacy
category and answers it consolidates? E.g. a tag citing legacy
category: Accounting and the “QuickBooks” answer scores
2 vs. one with only a vague rationale (0).

E scores each tag independently on the six rubrics above, with
all tags in 𝑇 scored in parallel; the per-tag composite is the sum
of the six rubric scores (on a /15 scale). The set-level score is the
mean per-tag composite reduced by small set-level deductions for
tag proliferation and category-coverage gaps, 𝑠 = E (𝑇 ) ∈ [0, 15];
the verdict mix summarizes the per-tag outcomes. The judge model
is GPT-5-4-mini at temperature zero; the generation model is GPT5-4. The seven-persona critic panel, the editor agent, and the final
parity-mapping stage all run on Claude Sonnet 4.6, a different model
family from the generator and the judge. The choice is deliberate:
a same-family stack would risk the loop reinforcing biases shared
across mutation and evaluation, and the cross-family arrangement
is the strongest readily available defense at production scale. E
was recalibrated against product-manager (PM) review: bare-noun
tags like “Appliances” originally scored a legibility of 3 but scored
≤ 1 after recalibration, since a working appliance-repair pro reads
“Appliances” as either trivially true or meaningless, not informative.

4.3

Set-Level Penalty (𝜌)

The E judge scores each tag in isolation, so a catalog of individually high-scoring tags can still be poor as a set. 𝑇 can be bloated
with near-duplicate siblings, or leave real pro preferences with no
corresponding tag. The set-level penalty 𝜌 (𝑇 ) corrects for this by deducting from the composite two failures the per-tag rubrics cannot
see: tag proliferation (an excess of sibling tags under a single parent,
which fragments the catalog and the pro-facing UI) and coverage
gaps (legacy preferences in 𝑄𝑜 which pros both enrolled and deselected recently that no tag captures, including whole categories left
untagged; §4.6). Subtracting 𝜌 (𝑇 ) before the critic penalties (§4.4),
𝑎 = 𝑠 − 𝜌 (𝑇 ), makes the loop optimize for a coherent, well-covered
catalog rather than a collection of locally excellent but globally
redundant or incomplete tags.

KDD2026 Workshop, August 2026, Jeju, Korea

4.4

Seven-Persona Critic Panel

After E scoring, the full tag set is reviewed by seven critic-personas
running in parallel, each returning a verdict that is reduced to a
weighted contribution to the composite score. Most contributions
are penalties; the Reasoning critic can instead award a small bonus
for strong rationales. The exact penalty formulas, caps, and bonus
thresholds are tabulated in Appendix A.1 The critics are:
• PM critic: Would a product manager (PM) find this tag
actionable? Surfaces design-stage issues (mutual-exclusivity,
awkward dimensionality); penalized only when rejections
exceed a small free allowance.
• Pro critic (penalty capped at 2.5): Would a working pro
in this occupation find this useful or confusing? The cap
prevents a single skeptical persona from dominating the
verdict.
• Taxonomy critic: Are tags at consistent levels of abstraction, are unions broken into components, are subtypes grouped?
Penalized as structural consistency falls below the threshold.
• Adversarial critic: Where could the tag set be gamed or
misinterpreted to extract leads that the pro cannot deliver?
Penalty scales with the assessed risk level and the number
of critical failures.
• Reasoning-Quality critic (bonus-eligible): Does the generation explain why each tag exists? Strong rationales (score
≥ 8) earn a small bonus; weak ones incur a penalty.
• Occupation-Coherence critic: Does the tag set, taken as a
whole, describe this occupation rather than a generic union
of services?
• Parity critic: Do the generated tags map to a given occupation’s top-30 most-deselected legacy answers (i.e., answers
active pros have explicitly opted out of), ranked by distinctpro count over a 90-day window? Its penalty is small by
design (at most ∼ 1 point); the quantitative coverage enforcement lives in the set-level penalty 𝜌 (§4.3). When an
occupation has no deselection signal, the critic returns a
neutral score and contributes nothing.

4.5

Editor Agent

The editor R is the loop’s mutation operator: at each iteration, it
proposes exactly one targeted edit to the current best prompt 𝑝𝑜★
and returns the revised prompt together with a one-line description
of the change. A key design point is that the editor is driven by
the judge E, not the critics: the critic penalties gate which prompts
survive (through the composite 𝑎), whereas the editor decides what
to change from the E signal and the coverage signal alone.
Target-dimension selection. The editor ranks two complementary
kinds of signals and targets the weakest. The first is per-tag quality:
the six E rubrics, each averaged across the tag set to yield one mean
per rubric. The second is set-level coverage: a single parity-coverage
1 An earlier design used a hard veto from the Pro Critic. In early production runs, the
veto dominated keep/discard decisions, and the loop stalled on occupations where one
persona consistently rejected proposals that other critics rated favorably. The current
design replaces the veto with a weighted penalty capped at 2.5 on the composite-of-15
scale; low enough that a strong proposal can still be kept over Pro objections, high
enough that consistent Pro disapproval pulls the adjusted score below the discard
threshold. The cap and rate were set empirically; the panel module records the change
as “softened to weighted penalty, capped at 2.5.”

KDD2026 Workshop, August 2026, Jeju, Korea

Kartik Ravisankar, Hojat Abdolanezhad, Daniel Capo, Sang Su Lee, Shishir Dash, and Vijay Anand Raghavan

score for the catalog as a whole. Coverage cannot be expressed as a
seventh rubric, since E scores the tags that exist, whereas coverage
is a property of the legacy preferences that have no tag, so there
is nothing per-tag to score. It is therefore injected as a synthetic
dimension, giving catalog incompleteness a seat in the ranking
alongside tag-quality weaknesses. The coverage dimension is a
score (higher is better), 2 min(𝑟 +, 𝑟 − ) ∈ [0, 2], where 𝑟 +, 𝑟 − ∈ [0, 1]
are the fractions of enrolled and deselected preferences the catalog
covers; the 0–2 scaling puts it on the same footing as the rubric
means. This ranking score is used only to select the target dimension
and is distinct from the set-level penalty 𝜌 (§4.3), which turns the
same coverage signal into points subtracted from the composite.
The editor then targets the lowest-scoring dimension that has not
already been addressed in the previous N iterations (default N = 2),
a constraint that prevents fixation on a single persistent weakness
and forces progress across both quality and coverage rather than
over-optimizing one axis.
Conditioning. For the chosen dimension, the editor is given the
tags scoring weakest on it (E rationales with a score ≤ 1, or the specific unmapped preferences when parity-coverage is targeted), the
dimension’s score trend across iterations (improving / stable / worsening), and a log of prior edits annotated with their kept/discarded
outcomes. It is instructed to propose exactly one change, to try a
fundamentally different approach when a dimension keeps worsening despite edits targeting it, and never to repeat a previously
discarded change. The revised prompt 𝑝𝑜(𝑡 +1) is then regenerated
and rescored (§4.1), and kept only if its composite score improves.

4.6

Parity mapping

Once the loop terminates with the best catalog 𝑇 ★, a final LLM pass
migrates the occupation’s legacy RF Q&A 𝑄𝑜 onto the new tags,
producing the many-to-many relation 𝑀 ★ ⊆ 𝑇 ★ × 𝑄𝑜 returned by
Algorithm 1. The autoresearch design ensures that the generated
catalog covers a good fraction of legacy taxonomies (explicitly in
§4.3, parity critic in §4.4, and set level coverage in §4.5). 𝑀 ★, on the
other hand, is explicit and auditable: it records exactly which legacy
preferences map to which tags and which remain uncovered, producing the human-reviewable artifact used to sign off the catalog
before deployment. For each legacy answer, the mapper finds all
tags that cover the same real-world concept; a single answer may
map to several tags (for example, a specific tag and the broader
tag above it), which is why 𝑀 ★ is a many-to-many relation rather
than a function. Aggregated across the 132-occupation production
catalog, 𝑀 ★ is also what yields the reconstruction-fidelity numbers quoted in §1: 73.3% of legacy answers map directly to a tag
in the regenerated catalog; 20.8% are intake-only answers (sizes,
ranges, “flexible”) excluded as acceptable non-tags; the remaining
6.0% are regrettable misses, real preferences left uncovered. Measured against the answers that should map, pooled coverage is
92.5%, with a per-occupation median of 100% (mean 97.8%).

5

Deployment

The reconstructed catalog has been running in production since
April 2026. This section describes how catalogs were generated at
scale across the occupation set and how each catalog was staged
for human review before going live.

Catalog Generation. Each occupation is reconstructed independently by the per-occupation loop of §4.1: starting from the shared
baseline prompt, the generator, judge, critic panel, and editor iterate
for the fixed budget, after which the parity mapping produces the
occupation’s best catalog 𝑇 ★, its tag↔Q&A relation 𝑀 ★, and the
residual sets 𝑈𝑄★, 𝑈𝑇★. Because the loop is occupation-local, the 132
occupations are processed independently and in parallel. Every run
persists a full audit trail: a per-occupation iteration log recording
each kept change with its rationale and target dimension, a snapshot of the best tag set and its scores at each iteration, and the
parity-mapping outcome. These artifacts are both retained per run
and streamed to a shared reviewer workspace as iterations are kept
(§5), so the catalog and its rationale are available for inspection
while a run is still in progress.
Human QA at Scale. No catalog is deployed without human signoff, so each generated catalog is seeded into a shared Google Sheet
for review. Results were uploaded live during a run into managed
per-occupation tabs: Best (the current tag set), Iteration Log (every kept change with its rationale), Tricky Parity Cases (ambiguous legacy mappings flagged for attention), and Comment Archive
(resolved reviewer comments). The parity tab includes a Verdict
dropdown (Keep/Update/Delete) with conditional formatting, and
reviewers can inline-edit tag names. Review is not a one-way gate:
unresolved reviewer comments are polled from the sheet (via the
Drive API) and written to a per-occupation feedback file, which the
generator and editor read on the next run. Human feedback, such
as renamed tags, deletions, and free-text objections, therefore feeds
directly back into the automated loop, closing the gap between
manual review and regeneration.
Scale and Coverage. The system has been live across 132 occupations. New occupations are onboarded on demand from a single
configuration entry: a per-occupation config file maps each occupation slug to its data-warehouse table names and primary keys, and
adding an occupation requires only that entry. Automotive Detailing,
for example, was added and taken end-to-end: baseline generation,
autoresearch loop, parity mapping, and human QA review, within
five hours on a single day in May 2026.

6 Evaluation and Operational Lessons
6.1 Catalog Quality vs. Deployment Outcomes
The autoresearch loop produces a catalog whose quality is measured
in one space (the E composite plus the seven critic penalties ), and
the deployment is measured in another (filter-evaluation outcomes,
occupation concentration). Conflating the two muddles attribution:
a missing-canonical-tag filter rate of 40.66% in production is not
a verdict on the catalog, it is a verdict on the deployment-side
seeding step that was supposed to attach canonical tags to existing
pro profiles. Likewise, the loop-internal critic penalties say nothing
about whether request-time enrichment actually emits the right
tags in production. We separate the two strands explicitly in what
follows.

6.2

Catalog-Quality Metrics

E composite distributions. Across the 132-occupation production runs, the per-tag E composite (out of 15) lands in a relatively

Autoresearch for Marketplace Catalogs:
From Legacy Forms to AI-Native Matching

KDD2026 Workshop, August 2026, Jeju, Korea

Table 1: Cross-occupation structural-prefix (KV-key) drift on
the 𝑛 = 14 occupation cross-section (189 tags), case-folded.
The four shared keys confirm partial standardization without
a global hierarchy; the eight singletons and case variants are
the residual drift targeted by the next autoresearch wave.
Structural prefix (KV-key)

Occupations

Capability
Work type
Deliverable
Scope
8 singleton prefixes (each)

9 / 14
9 / 14
7 / 14
7 / 14
1 / 14

narrow band on the best kept catalog per occupation: the bulk of
tags score in the 11–14 range, with low-end outliers concentrated
on Canonical Coverage (the binary 0-or-2 rubric) for occupations
whose legacy categories do not have an obvious single-tag canonical
mapping.
Critic-panel score distributions. As designed, the Pro critic accumulates the largest aggregate penalty mass (capped at 2.5 per
iteration; Appendix A); the Adversarial critic contributes a sparse
but heavy-tailed distribution dominated by the critical risk tier;
and the Reasoning bonus fires on roughly the iterations where the
editor’s most recent change was a rationale upgrade.
Cross-occupation tag-name drift. Because each occupation’s catalog is generated in isolation, two occupations whose tags should
share a name could drift apart. We measure this on a 14-occupation,
189-tag cross-section at two layers:
(i) Pro-facing tag strings (the names shown to pros, e.g., Cabinet
installation) all 189 are unique to their occupation. Occupation-local
vocabulary is preserved as intended: chess tutoring emits Adult
chess tutoring, not a generic Adult that would also fit physical
therapy. This is an exact-string check; semantic near-duplicates
like Installation vs Installations are a within-occupation Taxonomycritic concern, not a cross-occupation one.
(ii) Structural category prefixes (the part before the colon in
each tag’s structured form, e.g., Work type in Work type: Cabinet
installation — the axis the matchmaker and pricing model filter on)
12 distinct prefixes across the cohort after case-folding, distributed
as shown in Table 1. Four are widely shared: Capability and Work
type in 9/14 occupations, Deliverable and Scope in 7/14, confirming
partial standardization emerges without a global hierarchy. Two
residual drifts are both targets for the next autoresearch wave: (a)
eight singleton prefixes, three of which are clearly the same concept
under different names (Client preference, Client type, Customer
type); and (b) case inconsistency on shared prefixes (e.g., Deliverable
vs DELIVERABLE).
Planned dual-evaluator validation. A complementary validation
we plan (eval-of-eval) compares the production E judge against
an independently-developed external evaluator (different judge
model, different rubric structure, different thresholds) on the same
per-occupation tag set, structured around verdict-agreement rate,
per-rubric Cohen’s 𝜅 on the six shared dimensions, and a criticbased qualitative analysis of disagreement tags.

Critic ablation. A single-occupation Parity-removed critic ablation on Accounting (Appendix D) re-aggregates the production
iteration log under a six-critic configuration. On the observed Accounting run, the Parity critic returned parity_score = 7/10 in
both kept iterations — above the panel’s penalty thresholds — and
therefore contributed zero to the critic penalty. Removing Parity
from the panel leaves the adjusted-score trajectory and the final
best tag set unchanged on this occupation. We read this as evidence that, on occupations where parity-readiness is comfortably
above the penalty floor, the Parity critic’s seat is insurance against
the lower-readiness tail rather than an active per-iteration contributor; characterizing Parity’s marginal contribution across the
132-occupation cohort is the next ablation-program step.

6.3

Deployment-Side Metrics

The 14-day production post-launch cohort study ( 1,840 MVPenrolled pros, 9,324,798 filter evaluations over 2026-04-28 to 2026-0512) characterizes the catalog as deployed, distinct from the catalog
as generated.
Catalog hygiene. Three catalog tags marked status = 2 (deprecated) were still being emitted by request-time enrichment as
canonical category tags, driving roughly 486,000 filter events in
the window. The implicated tags—Heavy lifting, Bathroom remodel,
Wallpaper installation or repair—came from a request-side reversemapping table that was never reconciled with the catalog’s activestatus flag. The autoresearch loop did not surface this finding directly: it produced a per-occupation catalog whose deployment,
monitored at the filter-evaluation event level, exposed the requestside / pro-side mismatch. The surfacing came from per-event deployment monitoring—any per-event monitoring pipeline against a
hierarchical or per-occupation build could have detected the same
SQL signal. What per-occupation independence specifically contributes is unambiguous attribution: in a unified hierarchy “Heavy
lifting” has a defensible existence as a Moving-and-Lifting sub-tag,
so the deprecation flag is one signal among many and the diagnosis
is “data-quality nuisance”; under per-occupation independence the
deprecated tag has no occupation that claims it as canonical, so the
request-side emission is unambiguously a request-side / pro-side
mismatch and the fix path is mechanical (re-activate the tag or remove from the reverse mapping). The contribution is the diagnostic
clarity, not the diagnostic visibility.
Filter outcome distribution. For the same cohort, the strict-match
filter outcome distribution is shown in Table 2. The dominant
failure mode—missing canonical category tag, 40.66% of all MVP
evaluations—is a deployment-stage gap, not a catalog-quality gap:
the catalog tag exists, request-side enrichment fires it, but the pro’s
profile was never seeded with it. This motivates the deploymentside intervention (auto-attach canonical category tags at MVP onboarding) and validates the Parity critic’s instinct that catalog completeness without deployment-side wiring is not production coverage.
Occupation concentration. The same cohort surfaced a strong concentration of filter events: Handyman alone accounted for roughly
70% of MVP filter events (3.77M of 5.43M filtered evaluations). Four
other occupations had structurally high trigger rates: Roofing/siding

KDD2026 Workshop, August 2026, Jeju, Korea

Kartik Ravisankar, Hojat Abdolanezhad, Daniel Capo, Sang Su Lee, Shishir Dash, and Vijay Anand Raghavan

Table 2: Strict-match filter outcome distribution across 9.3M MVP filter evaluations in the 14-day post-launch window. The
dominant failure mode—missing canonical category tag—accounts for 40.66% of all MVP evaluations and is, by itself, larger
than the sum of all other filter reasons combined.
Outcome

Filter evaluations

% of MVP evals

PASSED
FILTERED: missing canonical category tag
FILTERED: missing hybrid-preference data
FILTERED: no canonical tag, no category-level targeting
FILTERED: limitation on RF preference tag
FILTERED: no targeted occupation match
FILTERED: limitation on canonical preference tag

3,898,008
3,791,760
743,341
568,254
306,531
14,740
2,164

41.80%
40.66%
7.97%
6.09%
3.29%
0.16%
0.02%

Total

9,324,798

100.00%

(73.5%), Home technology (72.8%), Doors/windows (67.0%), Appliances (66.5%). This suggests the canonical tag taxonomy for these
occupations does not match how pros describe their work. These
are concrete targets for the next autoresearch wave, identifiable
because per-occupation results are not averaged into a global score.
Directional post-launch signals (extended MVP window). We did
an MVP analysis at 8–10 weeks post-launch (June–July 2026) and
opened up enrollment from the 1,840-pro cohort above to ∼3,900
pros. We got directional, though not causal, evidence consistent
with the generated-vs-deployed attribution of §6.1. (i) About 88% of
enrolled pros remained enrolled, with attrition concentrated among
high-volume providers and attributed to price and lead-mix economics, not catalog semantics. (ii) Of 4,721 “not what I do” lead-declines,
94% came from providers whose recorded preferences already excluded that work. While early, we interpret this as an enforcement gap, not a vocabulary gap. Additionally, a review from our
category-management team recommended seven point changes to
the deployed taxonomy. (iii) About 35% of newly recorded provider
limitations arrive through the LLM refinement flow built on the
generated catalog. Where no preference was adopted, around 75%
trace to user-experience gaps rather than rejection of a suggested
tag (∼21% explicit rejections). (iv) Finally, churn and refunds seem
to cluster amongst pros who had narrow legacy categories that
mapped into broad new-catalog occupations, and providers with
no legacy-category crosswalk link received ∼35% fewer leads, consistent with the canonical-assignment and parity lessons of §6.4.
An outcome-level comparison against legacy forms remains future
work.

6.4

Operational Lessons from the Loop

Canonical-tag assignment is structurally different from holistic
generation. An earlier version of the pipeline assigned canonical
category tags inside the generation prompt. This was migrated to a
dedicated mapping-phase LLM call that runs before each mapping
batch and injects canonical context. The architectural separation
produced both better canonical coverage and more consistent generation (the generator now focuses on holistic tag creation; canonical
assignment is a structured decision with its own prompt and examples).

Table 3: Convergence behavior across 132 production occupations. The reported iteration is the one that produced
the best kept tag set per occupation (index 0 denotes occupations whose baseline was never beaten); the “adjusted
score” is E composite − critic penalty. Quartiles use the standard linear-interpolation convention (NumPy percentile
default).
Metric
Iteration index of best tag set
E composite of best tag set (/ 15)
Critic penalty on best tag set
Adjusted score on best tag set (/ 15)
Tag count on best tag set

Value (min / q1 / median / q3 / max)
0/1/2/3/3
7.69 / 13.32 / 13.84 / 14.20 / 14.90
0.50 / 2.49 / 3.62 / 4.85 / 9.70
2.34 / 8.63 / 10.17 / 11.41 / 13.96
2 / 17 / 26 / 44.25 / 136

Compound names are not unions. The canonical assignment rule
originally rejected any category whose name contained “and” or
“or” (treating it as a union of distinct services). This collapsed canonical coverage on Electrical from 10/10 to 1/10 because categories
like Circuit Breaker Panel or Fuse Box are compound names for a
single service, not unions. The refined rule requires actual RF Q&A
disambiguation evidence before rejecting a union category.
Stopping is budget-driven. The current loop stops at a fixed iteration budget (default 5) rather than at a convergence-based criterion. A confidence-interval criterion is dominated in cost by the
multi-trial evaluations it would require; across production runs the
kept-iteration count typically saturates well before the budget is exhausted (§6.5). The per-iteration early-skip described in §4.1 step 6
captures most of the available cost saving without committing to a
plateau heuristic the implementation does not yet support.

6.5

Convergence Behavior Across Production
Occupations

To characterize how often the loop converges within budget, we
aggregate the best-iteration summary row for each of the 132 production occupations from the autoresearch tracking logs. Table 3
summarizes the distribution.

Autoresearch for Marketplace Catalogs:
From Legacy Forms to AI-Native Matching

Three observations hold across the full 132-occupation cohort. (i)
The best kept tag set is reached by iteration 3 for every occupation—
36 at iteration 1, 53 at iteration 2, 38 at iteration 3, and 5 that
never beat their baseline (index 0)—with none reaching its best
after iteration 3, so the kept-iteration count saturates well before
the 5-iteration budget. (ii) The E composite is tightly clustered
(median 13.84/15, mean 13.53, interquartile range 13.32–14.20),
but the adjusted score spreads much wider (median 10.17, IQR
8.63–11.41): 19 of 132 occupations fall in the < 8 band that the
production verdict thresholds (§6.2) route to review or flag, almost
entirely on critic penalty rather than on a weak judge score. (iii)
The critic penalty (range 0.50–9.70, median 3.62) is therefore the
dominant source of variance in the adjusted score, consistent with
the asymmetric panel design (§A) in which the Adversarial critic
alone can contribute up to 2.0 on the critical risk tier.
Loop vs. single-shot generation. Iteration 0 of every production
run is single-shot generation: the shared seed prompt 𝑝 (0) applied
once, with no critics and no editor, so the tracking logs contain the
single-pass baseline directly. Across the 132-occupation cohort, the
loop lifts the per-occupation 𝐸 composite from a median of 11.36
at iteration 0 to 13.84 on the best kept set, a median gain of +2.24
points (IQR 1.60–2.64). It improves 119 of 132 occupations (100 by
at least one point, 87 by at least two); 5 never beat their baseline,
and 8 keep a set with equal-or-lower composite that wins on a
smaller critic penalty, since keeps are decided on the adjusted score.
This comparison runs under the loop’s own judge, so it isolates the
value of iterate-and-keep over single-pass generation; whether the
judge itself tracks human quality is assessed separately below.
E-only baseline (vanilla LLM-as-judge contrast). To isolate the
seven-critic panel’s marginal contribution at the verdict-decision
boundary, we re-bin all 132 best-iteration rows under an E-only configuration that drops the critic penalty entirely (critic_penalty :=
0) and applies the production thresholds (auto_approve ≥ 11,
human_review ≥ 8, flag < 8). The two configurations disagree
on 84 of 132 occupations (63.6%), and every disagreement is in
the same direction—the panel’s verdict is the same or stricter, the
expected sign because the critic penalty is non-negative. The distributions tell the story: E alone would auto_approve 125 of 132
occupations (94.7%), leaving a human-review queue of only 7; the
panel routes just 47 to auto_approve, 66 to human_review, and
19 to flag. The panel’s dominant operating mode is therefore to
demote tag sets the judge alone would wave through—it is what
creates the 85-occupation human-in-the-loop queue the production system relies on. This is a verdict-bucket comparison on the
converged best-iteration tag sets, not a re-run of the loop with the
panel disabled; the latter (the panel’s effect on the kept-iteration
trajectory) is the ablation scoped in §6.4.
E ↔PM-consensus agreement. Table 7 cross-tabulates the model’s
verdict against the production PM-consensus action over the 4,112
tags that received both, under the verdict map Keep↔auto-approve,
Update↔human-review, Delete↔flag. Raw agreement is 77.2%
(3,174/4,112), but this is almost entirely a base-rate effect: the model
auto-approves 97.3% of tags and reviewers keep 79.1%, so chance
agreement is already 77.2% and Cohen’s 𝜅 ≈ 0. The discrete 𝐸 verdict does not, on its own, predict which tags a human will reject.

KDD2026 Workshop, August 2026, Jeju, Korea

We report this negative result since it is the basis for using the E
composite as a ranking signal inside the loop rather than an acceptance gate, and for keeping human review mandatory before any
catalog deploys. One caveat is circularity on the legibility rubric,
which was recalibrated from the same PM review (§4.2).

7

Discussion

Our contribution is not a single algorithm but a system architecture
for reconstructing catalogs in marketplaces that carry substantial
legacy structured data, where getting the pro-side schema right
has downstream consequences. The composition we defend has
three elements: per-occupation independence, the seven-persona
critic panel, and a parity-mapping stage. While each module has its
own ancestry, what we add is their integration, the scale at which
the system runs in production (132 occupations, with new ones
onboarded on demand), and the operational lessons that scale has
surfaced. We see two clear extension paths as future work. First,
the search backend is currently a naive LLM proposal. GEPA-style
reflective optimization [1] with execution traces is an upgrade once
the critic-panel output is structured enough to serve as a reflection
signal. Second, the production feedback loop is currently humanin-the-loop (PM comments flow back via the live sheet). Routing
matchmaker-side production failures (eg, 41% missing-canonicaltag filter rate) into the next autoresearch iteration would close the
loop between catalog generation and matchmaking outcomes.
Trustworthiness considerations. The cross-family arrangement
described in §4.1 mitigates self-reinforcement between the generator (GPT-5-4 family) and the critics, editor, and parity mapper
(Claude Sonnet 4.6 family), but two residual trust gaps remain. (i)
Within Claude Sonnet 4.6, the editor and the seven critics share a
model family; an editor that is biased in a direction the critics also
endorse will not be caught by the loop, although it would be caught
by a cross-family critic seat. A natural mitigation is to host one
critic on a third model family (e.g., a Gemini- or Llama-class model)
and treat its disagreement as an explicit signal to the editor. (ii)
Critic disagreement is currently silent: the editor sees the aggregate
adjusted score, not the per-critic decomposition, so a high-variance
verdict (e.g., the Adversarial critic flags a critical failure that no
other critic surfaces) is averaged into the same scalar as a lowvariance verdict. Surfacing per-critic penalties and a disagreement
summary as explicit editor inputs is a direct upgrade to the loop’s
trustworthiness, and is a planned next iteration.

8

Conclusion

We presented a per-occupation autoresearch system for generating
marketplace catalogs, in production at a 132-occupation consumer
services marketplace. The contributions we defend are compositional: the unit of optimization (preference-tag catalog within an occupation), the per-occupation parallelism, the seven-persona critic
panel with weighted penalties, the legacy-Q&A-to-modern-tag migration via Step-Back abstraction, and the MEMORY_ONLY typing
primitive. Production deployment at scale surfaced an operational
catalog-hygiene finding (three deprecated tags driving 486K filter
events) that a global hierarchical build would have masked.

KDD2026 Workshop, August 2026, Jeju, Korea

Kartik Ravisankar, Hojat Abdolanezhad, Daniel Capo, Sang Su Lee, Shishir Dash, and Vijay Anand Raghavan

References
[1] Lakshya A. Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu, Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista
Opsahl-Ong, Arnav Singhvi, Herumb Shandilya, Michael J. Ryan, Meng Jiang,
Christopher Potts, Koushik Sen, Alexandros G. Dimakis, Ion Stoica, Dan Klein,
Matei Zaharia, and Omar Khattab. 2025. GEPA: Reflective Prompt Evolution Can
Outperform Reinforcement Learning. arXiv:2507.19457
[2] Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, et al. 2022. Constitutional AI:
Harmlessness from AI Feedback. arXiv:2212.08073 [cs.CL]
[3] Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. 2024. Improving Factuality and Reasoning in Language Models through
Multiagent Debate. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML).
[4] Liran Einav, Chiara Farronato, and Jonathan Levin. 2016. Peer-to-Peer Markets.
Annual Review of Economics 8 (2016), 615–635.
[5] Yunhan Huang, Klevis Ramo, Andrea Iovine, Melvin Monteiro, Sedat Gokalp,
Arjun Bakshi, Hasan Turalic, Arsh Kumar, Jona Neumeier, Ripley Yates, Rejaul
Monir, Simon Hartmann, Tushar Manglik, and Mohamed Yakout. 2025. AttributeForge: An Agentic LLM Framework for Automated Product Schema Modeling.
In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing: Industry Track. 2106–2121. doi:10.18653/v1/2025.emnlp-industry.148
[6] Hamel Husain. 2024. Critique Shadowing: Building Trustworthy LLM-as-Judge
Systems. Online essay, https://hamel.dev/blog/posts/llm-judge/. Accessed 202606-09.
[7] Priyanka Kargupta, Nan Zhang, Yunyi Zhang, Rui Zhang, Prasenjit Mitra, and
Jiawei Han. 2025. TaxoAdapt: Aligning LLM-Based Multidimensional Taxonomy
Construction to Evolving Research Corpora. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers).
https://aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.1442/
[8] Andrej Karpathy. 2026. autoresearch: AI agents running research on singleGPU nanochat training automatically. GitHub repository. https://github.com/
karpathy/autoresearch Released March 7, 2026.
[9] Nan Li, Bo Kang, and Tijl De Bie. 2025. Building Data-Driven Occupation Taxonomies: A Bottom-Up Multi-Stage Approach via Semantic Clustering and MultiAgent Collaboration. arXiv:2509.15786 Introduces the CLIMB multi-agent framework for occupation hierarchy construction.
[10] Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah
Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, Shashank
Gupta, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Katherine Hermann, Sean Welleck, Amir
Yazdanbakhsh, and Peter Clark. 2023. Self-Refine: Iterative Refinement with
Self-Feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS).
[11] Krista Opsahl-Ong, Michael J. Ryan, Josh Purtell, David Broman, Christopher
Potts, Matei Zaharia, and Omar Khattab. 2024. Optimizing Instructions and
Demonstrations for Multi-Stage Language Model Programs (MIPROv2). In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
[12] Mengting Wan, Tara Safavi, Sujay Kumar Jauhar, Yujin Kim, Scott Xu, Subhabrata
Mukherjee, et al. 2024. TnT-LLM: Text Mining at Scale with Large Language
Models. In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’24).
[13] Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Swaroop Mishra, Xinyun Chen, Heng-Tze Cheng, Ed H.
Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. 2024. Take a Step Back: Evoking Reasoning via
Abstraction in Large Language Models. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR).
[14] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu,
Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang,
Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging LLM-as-a-Judge with MTBench and Chatbot Arena. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS).

Autoresearch for Marketplace Catalogs:
From Legacy Forms to AI-Native Matching

A

KDD2026 Workshop, August 2026, Jeju, Korea

Scoring Details

Tables 4, 5, 6 enumerate the judge scores, critic panel scores, and
the set penalty rules applied.
The composite score that drives the keep/discard decision is
Í
𝑎 = 𝑠−𝜌 (𝑇 )− 𝑘 𝑤𝑘 𝜋𝑘 (𝑇 ), where 𝑠 is the E1 set score (Table 4), 𝜌 (𝑇 )
Í
is the set-level penalty (Table 6), and 𝑘 𝑤𝑘 𝜋𝑘 (𝑇 ) is the aggregate
critic penalty (Table 5). The pre-critic quantity 𝑎ˆ = 𝑠 − 𝜌 (𝑇 ) is
floored at 0 and gates whether the critic panel runs.
Table 4: E1 LLM-as-judge dimensions. Each tag is scored on
all six rubrics; the per-tag composite is their sum on a /15
scale. The set score 𝑠 is the mean per-tag composite over the
Í
tag set 𝑇 , 𝑠 = |𝑇1 | 𝜏 ∈𝑇 composite(𝜏) ∈ [0, 15].
Rubric (per tag)

Range

Screening vs. Intake
Tag Legibility
Preference Variance
Cross-Category Consistency
Canonical Coverage
Information Loss

0–3
0–3
0–3
0–2
{0, 2}
0–2

Per-tag composite (sum)
Set score 𝑠 (mean over 𝑇 )

0–15
[0, 15]

Table 6: Set-level penalty 𝜌 (𝑇 ). Components are summed;
𝑎ˆ = 𝑠 − 𝜌 (𝑇 ) is floored at 0. The positive/negative parity terms
use the pro-weighted regrettable-coverage ratios 𝑟 +, 𝑟 − and
activate only below a 0.90 coverage target.
Component

Rule

Tag proliferation

uncapped†

Positive parity (enroll.)
Negative parity (desel.)

+0.5 per parent tag with > 8
children
1.0· #fully-unmapped
categories
10 (0.90 − 𝑟 + ) if 𝑟 + < 0.90
10 (0.90 − 𝑟 − ) if 𝑟 − < 0.90

𝜌 (𝑇 ) total

sum of the above

∼ [0, 13]

Parity category gaps

Cap

3.0
4.0
6.0

† Implemented guardrail; the current generator emits no tag hierarchy, so this term

did not activate in our runs.

Setup. The starting prompt 𝑝𝑜(𝑡 ) for Accounting is the team’s
current best prompt as of the run, with prior kept changes already
applied. The legacy data feed for Accounting includes the categoryto-RF-question schema for the occupation’s mapped categories (e.g.,
Tax preparation, Bookkeeping services, Accounting consultations) and
the observed answer distributions per category from the 90-day
deselection window.

Per-tag verdict bands: auto-approve ( ≥ 11), human-review (8–10), flag (< 8).

Step 1 (Generate). The generator (GPT-5-4) emits a candidate
tag set 𝑇 (𝑡 ) of ∼ 37 tags. A representative slice: Individual tax
returns, Small-business bookkeeping, Quarterly tax filings, Audit representation, Cash-basis accounting, Accrual-basis accounting, Payroll
services, Sales and use tax, Multi-state filings, Nonprofit accounting.

Table 5: Critic panel. Each persona maps its structured verdict to a penalty; the aggregate critic penalty is the sum,
Í
𝑘 𝑤 𝑘 𝜋𝑘 (𝑇 ). All scores are LLM-assigned on a 0–10 scale unless noted; counts are non-negative integers. The Reasoning
critic is the only bonus-eligible persona.

Step 2 (Evaluate, E). GPT-5-4-mini scores the set on the six
rubrics. Per-rubric means cluster as: Screening vs. Intake ≈ 2.7/3,
Tag Legibility ≈ 2.6/3, Preference Variance ≈ 2.4/3, Cross-Category
Consistency ≈ 1.7/2, Canonical Coverage = 2/2 (every legacy category mapped), Information Loss ≈ 1.5/2. Composite 𝑠 (𝑡 ) ≈ 12.9/15.
The lowest-scoring rubric is Information Loss, driven by the consolidation of several legacy answer variants under a single tag.

Critic

Penalty rule

Cap / bonus

PM

0.15 · max(0, 𝑟 − 2) ,
𝑟 =#rejections
0.15𝑣 + 0.2𝑖
(𝑣 =vetoes,
𝑖 =irrelevant)
0.2·max(0, 5−𝜎 ) , 𝜎 =structural
score
risk { low 0, med 0.5, high 1.0,
crit 2.0} + 0.3· #critical failures
< 4: + 1.0; < 6: + 0.5; ≥ 8: − 0.3
< 5: + 1.0; < 7: + 0.5
< 3: + 1.0; < 5: + 0.5

first 2 rejections free

Pro
Taxonomy
Adversarial
Reasoning
Coherence
Parity

capped at 2.5
—
—
bonus −0.3
—
neutral 5 if no data

The aggregate can be slightly negative when the Reasoning bonus exceeds other
penalties.

Step 3 (Critique, panel). All seven critics run in parallel on the full
37-tag set, with the Parity critic also seeing the 90-day deselection
top-30 for Accounting. Representative aggregated penalties on this
iteration:
• PM: 1 ship-block on a tag with awkward phrasing ⇒ penalty
0 (under the free-allowance threshold of 2 rejections).
• Pro: 1 veto + 2 irrelevant flags ⇒ min(0.15+0.40, 2.5) = 0.55.
• Taxonomy: structural score 7/10 ⇒ penalty 0.
• Adversarial: low risk, no critical failures ⇒ penalty 0.
• Reasoning: rationale-quality score 8/10 ⇒ bonus −0.3.
• Coherence: 8/10 ⇒ penalty 0.
• Parity: 7/10 ⇒ penalty 0.
(𝑡 )
Net critic penalty ≈ 0.25. Adjusted score 𝑠 adj
≈ 12.65/15.

B

Worked Example: One Autoresearch Iteration
on Accounting

To make the loop concrete, this appendix walks through a single iteration on Accounting (37 tags, the smallest production occupation).
The walkthrough is reconstructed from the live tracking sheet’s Iteration Log tab and the per-iteration production snapshots. Numerical
values are stated as observed.

Step 4 (Edit). The editor agent (Claude Sonnet 4.6) is shown the
lowest-scoring rubric (Information Loss) and the highest-penalty
critic (Pro). Its proposed change is a targeted edit to the crosscategory consolidation rule in the prompt: "Distinguish cash-basis
vs. accrual-basis bookkeeping at the tag level rather than as composition_rationale; pros self-select differently." It is a single-paragraph
delta against 𝑝𝑜(𝑡 ) , not a rewrite.

KDD2026 Workshop, August 2026, Jeju, Korea

Kartik Ravisankar, Hojat Abdolanezhad, Daniel Capo, Sang Su Lee, Shishir Dash, and Vijay Anand Raghavan

Step 5 (Keep / discard). Regenerating with 𝑝𝑜(𝑡 +1) produces a candidate set with one new tag (Cash-basis bookkeeping) and a refined version of Accrual-basis accounting. The new pre-critic E
composite is ≈ 13.2/15 (a +0.3 delta on Information Loss without
regression elsewhere); the new critic penalty drops to ≈ 0.05 (Pro
penalty 0.35 from 1 veto + 1 irrelevant flag, down from iter-1’s
0.55, with the Reasoning −0.3 bonus retained). New adjusted score
≈ 13.15/15 > 12.65, so the change is kept, and the kept change is
logged to the Iteration Log tab with the editor’s stated rationale.
The walkthrough above is one of several iterations the live sheet
records for Accounting.

C

Model Verdict vs. Reviewer Action

Table 7 cross-tabulates the model’s E verdict against the reviewer’s
action for the 4,112 tags that received both.
Table 7: Confusion matrix between the model’s E1
verdict (columns) and the human reviewer’s action
(rows), over 4,112 tags that received both. Categories are
aligned as auto_approve ↔ Keep, human_review ↔ Update,
flag ↔ Delete.
Model E1 verdict
Reviewer

D

auto_approve

human_review

flag

Total

Keep
Update
Delete

3,164
292
547

88
10
10

1
0
0

3,253
302
557

Total

4,003

108

1

4,112

Critic Ablation: Accounting with the Parity
Critic Disabled

This appendix reports a single-occupation critic ablation. The premise
of the seven-critic panel is that no single critic carries the loop alone;
the Parity critic in particular is the panel’s distinctive coverage
signal. To probe how much the Parity critic contributes on a representative small occupation we run Accounting twice—once in the
production seven-critic configuration, once with the Parity critic
removed from the panel—and compare the kept-iteration trajectory
and the final adjusted score. We choose Accounting because (a) it is
the smallest production occupation (37 tags, ≈ 15–20 minutes per
run) so the ablation is cheap, and (b) it has a non-trivial deselection
signal so the Parity critic is informative on it.
Methodology — synthetic ablation from the production iteration
log. The ablation re-aggregates the seven per-critic outputs in the
production Accounting iteration log under the production sevencritic configuration vs. a six-critic configuration with the Parity
entry removed, using the weight formulas in Appendix A. The
synthetic ablation reproduces the score delta that Parity contributed
per iteration, holding the rest of the run trajectory fixed. It does not
simulate the editor agent’s response to a different adjusted-score
trajectory; a full run with Parity disabled would require re-invoking
the generation+evaluation+editor pipeline end-to-end on a clean
Bedrock environment, and is reserved for the multi-occupation
ablation study scoped in §6.4.

Result. On the Accounting run, Parity returned parity_score
= 7/10 on iteration 1 and 7/10 on iteration 2. Both scores are above
the penalty thresholds (penalty fires only at parity_score < 3
(+1.0) or < 5 (+0.5); Appendix A row 7), so the Parity critic contributed exactly 0.0 to the critic penalty on both observed iterations.
Removing Parity from the panel therefore leaves the production
adjusted scores unchanged (12.65 on iteration 1, 13.15 on iteration
2) and the keep/discard trajectory unchanged (13.15 > 12.65 is kept
under both configurations). The final best tag set is identical.
Reading the result. On Accounting, in this run, the Parity critic
is redundant with the existing positive-parity-readiness floor —
its panel seat is reserved insurance against occupations where
parity_score drops below 5 rather than an active contributor
to the kept/discard decision on this occupation. This is the negativeresult-as-evidence pattern the appendix opens with: a single-occupation
ablation cannot characterize the Parity critic’s marginal contribution across the 132-occupation cohort, but it does establish that
on at least one production occupation the Parity critic earns its
seat through the threshold structure (no penalty when parityreadiness is comfortable) rather than through active per-iteration
influence. A multi-occupation ablation across occupations with
lower parity_score (e.g., occupations where the per-occupation
deselection cohort is shallow; cf. the activation-rate distribution in
§4.4) is the next step in the ablation program and is reserved for
the camera-ready follow-up.

