On Recursive Resolution: Scalable Ground Truth for
Self-Improving AI Systems
Disha

Jason Whang

Manikandarajan Ramanathan

Amazon
USA
disha@amazon.com

Amazon
USA
jwhang@amazon.com

Amazon
USA
mramnat@amazon.com

ABSTRACT

1

Compound retrieval-augmented question-answering (QA) systems
present a fundamental evaluation challenge: manual annotation
does not scale, yet automated evaluation lacks the ground truth
necessary for calibration. We introduce a self-improving evaluation
architecture that addresses this circular dependency through three
contributions. First, iterative consensus synthesis: an algorithm that
treats LLM-human agreement as a free signal, escalating only disagreements to additional annotators and achieving multi-annotator
reliability at 15.95× lower cost. Second, a tiered Wilson interval
framework that transforms noisy binary judgments into confidencebounded evaluation results, correctly identifying regressions that
raw failure rates obscure. Third, recursive resolution: an architecture
where evaluation thresholds update based on remedy effectiveness,
enabling systems to improve their own detection criteria over time.
We validate on a compound retrieval-augmented QA system across
13 quality metrics and three locale-specific test suites. The system
completed full improvement cycles detecting a 44% content coverage gap during retrieval, validating a targeted fix through shadow
evaluation, and generalizing the pattern to prevent similar regressions on other locale-specific test sets. These results demonstrate
that scalable, self-improving evaluation of compound AI systems is
achievable without sacrificing annotation quality.

Automated evaluation of compound AI systems faces a bootstrapping paradox: calibrating an LLM evaluator requires ground truth
labels, yet generating those labels at scale is precisely what automation should eliminate. This circularity is acute for retrievalaugmented QA systems, where retrieval, ranking, generation, and
safety components interact to produce emergent conversational
behaviors that cannot be assessed through component-level metrics. A compound RAG system exemplifies this complexity: a single
user interaction may traverse multiple model components, with
conversation quality depending on their collective behavior across
several turns.
Traditional evaluation relies on domain experts who manually
assess conversations. This produces high-quality annotations but
faces prohibitive scaling constraints. Our baseline required 26 human annotators working 10 days to evaluate 720 synthetic conversations (∼2.6 person-hours each). This bottleneck delays launches for
new features, limits regression detection, and prevents continuous
monitoring. LLM-as-judge approaches [6, 12] offer an alternative
but either assume access to ground truth for calibration or accept uncalibrated judgments, neither satisfying production requirements.
We break this circularity with iterative consensus synthesis: an
algorithm that treats LLM-human agreement as a free signal. When
an LLM evaluator and human annotator agree, their concordant
judgment becomes ground truth; no additional annotation required.
When they disagree, a second human annotator provides a tiebreaker
via majority vote. This selective escalation achieves multi-annotator
reliability at single-annotator cost (15.95× reduction). We combine
this with a Wilson interval decision framework that transforms
noisy per-conversation scores into confidence-bounded performance evaluations, and embed both within a five-layer architecture
where evaluation outcomes inform remediation and remedy effectiveness refines future detection thresholds. We termed it recursive
resolution.

CCS CONCEPTS
• General and reference → Evaluation.

KEYWORDS
LLM evaluation, compound AI systems, self-improving systems,
annotation efficiency
ACM Reference Format:
Disha, Jason Whang, and Manikandarajan Ramanathan. 2026. On Recursive
Resolution: Scalable Ground Truth for Self-Improving AI Systems. In Proceedings of August 9–13, 2026 (KDD ’26). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 8 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
KDD ’26, Jeju, Korea,
© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

INTRODUCTION

Contributions. We make three contributions: (1) iterative consensus synthesis, an algorithm that reduces annotation cost from 7,672
to 481 hours while generating ground truth across 13 quality metrics; (2) a tiered Wilson interval framework for statistically rigorous,
multi-metric performance evaluations; and (3) demonstration of
complete recursive resolution cycles across three locale-specific
test suites, where the system identified content gaps, validated fixes
through shadow evaluation, and generalized findings to prevent
similar regressions.

KDD ’26, Jeju, Korea,
Disha, Jason Whang, and Manikandarajan Ramanathan

2

RELATED WORK

LLM-as-Judge Evaluation. The use of large language models for
automated evaluation has gained substantial attention following
demonstrations of strong correlation with human judgments on
specific tasks. G-Eval [6] employs chain-of-thought prompting to
assess coherence and fluency, achieving improved alignment over
reference-based metrics. MT-Bench [12] introduces pairwise comparison for multi-turn dialogue, while AlpacaEval [5] addresses
length bias in instruction-following evaluation. These approaches
typically assume access to ground truth for calibration or accept
uncalibrated LLM judgments. Our work differs fundamentally by
treating ground truth generation as a first-class problem, developing an iterative consensus mechanism that produces calibration
data as a byproduct of the evaluation process itself.
Synthetic Data Generation for Dialogue. Generating synthetic conversations for training and evaluation spans templatebased approaches [8], retrieval-augmented generation [4], and fully
neural synthesis [10]. The challenge for evaluation differs from
training: synthetic test cases must cover the distribution of production scenarios while remaining realistic enough that quality assessments transfer to real conversations. Our synthetic conversation
generator addresses this through archetype-conditioned generation
combined with actual system responses, ensuring that generated
conversations reflect true system behavior rather than simulated
approximations.
Confidence Estimation and Statistical Testing. Rigorous
evaluation requires distinguishing true quality differences from
sampling noise. Card et al. [2] demonstrate that reported improvements in NLP often fall within confidence intervals, calling for
more careful statistical practice. Wilson score intervals [11] provide
robust confidence bounds for binomial proportions, performing
well even with small samples and extreme success rates, properties
essential for detecting rare but critical failures like safety violations.
We extend this framework to multi-metric evaluations with explicit
tier-based aggregation rules.
Self-Improving Systems. The concept of systems that improve
through their own outputs has deep roots in machine learning, from
online learning [9] to recent work on constitutional AI [1] and selfrefinement [7]. Our architecture operationalizes self-improvement
for evaluation systems specifically: the effectiveness of deployed
fixes feeds back to refine detection thresholds, root cause classifiers,
and remedy selection policies.

3 METHODS
3.1 Problem Formulation
Consider a compound AI system S that processes user conversations. Let C = {𝑐 1, . . . , 𝑐 𝑁 } denote a corpus of multi-turn conversations, where each conversation 𝑐 = {(𝑢 1, 𝑟 1 ), . . . , (𝑢𝑇 , 𝑟𝑇 )}
comprises user utterances 𝑢𝑡 and system responses 𝑟𝑡 . We seek
to evaluate S across 𝑀 quality metrics {𝑚 1, . . . , 𝑚𝑀 }, where each
metric 𝑚𝑖 : C → {0, 1} indicates whether conversation 𝑐 satisfies
quality criterion 𝑖.
The evaluation problem decomposes into three subproblems.
The ground truth problem asks: given limited annotation budget 𝐵,
how do we establish reliable ground truth labels G𝑖 (𝑐) for metric 𝑖
on conversation 𝑐? The coverage problem asks: given a production

query distribution 𝑃 (𝑞), how do we generate a test corpus C that
adequately covers likely interaction patterns? The decision problem
asks: given noisy estimates 𝑝ˆ𝑖 of metric failure rates, how do we
make statistically rigorous recommendations?
Our architecture addresses these problems through a five-layer
system with feedback from evaluation outcomes to threshold refinement.

3.2

System Architecture

The evaluation ecosystem comprises five layers operating in a
closed feedback loop (Figure 1). The Evaluation Layer (Layer 1)
ingests conversations from synthetic test suites, applying an LLMas-a-judge evaluator to assess quality across 13 metrics organized
into three priority tiers. The Root Cause Engine (Layer 2) aggregates detected violations, clusters similar issues using semantic
embeddings of evaluator reasoning, and classifies root causes into
six categories: prompt engineering deficiencies, conversation flow
failures, retrieval errors, model boundary violations, content gaps,
or evaluation system issues. The Remedy Engine (Layer 3) proposes
targeted interventions based on root cause classification: prompt
optimization, knowledge base updates, retrieval tuning, evaluation
threshold adjustment, with human approval required before deployment. The Rollout Manager (Layer 4) implements shadow deployment comparing candidate and control configurations, enforcing
automated gates for safety, quality, and latency before a candidate
configuration is accepted. The Continuous Learning Layer (Layer
5) tracks remedy effectiveness, identifies recurring patterns, and
feeds updated thresholds and detection rules back to Layer 1.
The recursive structure distinguishes our approach from static
evaluation pipelines. When a remedy successfully addresses an
issue cluster, Layer 5 updates the corresponding detection threshold
in Layer 1, effectively encoding the lesson that this failure mode
has been resolved. Conversely, when remedies prove ineffective,
Layer 5 may lower thresholds to increase sensitivity or flag the issue
category for human investigation. This feedback loop enables the
system to calibrate its own evaluation criteria based on empirical
outcomes rather than fixed heuristics.

3.3

Synthetic Conversation Generation

Comprehensive evaluation requires test cases that cover the distribution of interactions the system is expected to execute on. Manual
test creation achieved 720 conversations over 10 days with 26 annotators. The rate is insufficient for continuous evaluation as systems
evolve. Our synthetic conversation generator automates this process through archetype-conditioned conversation synthesis.
Let Q = {𝑞 1, . . . , 𝑞𝐾 } denote the set of top queries covering
85% of representative query traffic for a content domain, and let
T = {𝜏1, . . . , 𝜏5 } denote the conversation archetypes. For each
(𝑞, 𝜏) ∈ Q × T , the synthetic conversation generator produces
a conversation through iterative simulation. The user simulator,
implemented as a prompted LLM, generates utterances conditioned
on conversation history and archetype:
𝑢𝑡 +1 ∼ 𝑃LLM (𝑢 | 𝑐 1:𝑡 , 𝑞, 𝜏, 𝜙)

(1)

where 𝑐 1:𝑡 = {(𝑢 1, 𝑟 1 ), . . . , (𝑢𝑡 , 𝑟𝑡 )} is the conversation history and
𝜙 encodes archetype-specific behavioral constraints. The system

KDD ’26, Jeju, Korea,
On Recursive Resolution: Scalable Ground Truth for Self-Improving AI Systems

Figure 1: The closed-loop architecture enables recursive resolution: evaluation outcomes inform remediation, and remedy
effectiveness refines future evaluation. Forward arrows indicate forward flow; backward arrow indicates feedback from Layer 5
to Layer 1.

response 𝑟𝑡 +1 is obtained by invoking the actual compound RAG
system under test, ensuring that generated conversations reflect
true system behavior rather than simulated approximations.
Generation terminates under three conditions: the conversation reaches maximum length 𝑇max = 10 turns, the system routes
to human support (indicating inability to resolve automatically),
or the conversation reaches natural completion as determined by
the archetype specification. This procedure yields |Q| × |T | conversations per content domain, providing systematic coverage of
query-archetype combinations.
Human validators reviewed generated conversations to assess
quality. Of 1,946 generated conversations, validators flagged 7.45%
as exhibiting generation artifacts (incoherent user responses, unrealistic behavior) and 20.86% as revealing genuine system-under-test
issues (valuable for debugging but excluded from ground truth calibration). The remaining 71.79% formed the high-quality evaluation
corpus of 1,397 conversations.

3.4

Two-Round Iterative Ground Truth
Synthesis

Establishing ground truth for evaluator calibration presents a costquality tradeoff. Single-annotator labels are inexpensive but noisy;
multi-annotator consensus is reliable but expensive. Our two-round
mechanism achieves multi-annotator quality at reduced cost by
exploiting agreement structure (Figure 2).
Let 𝐸𝑖 (𝑐) ∈ {0, 1} denote the LLM judge’s judgment for metric 𝑖 on conversation 𝑐, and let 𝑀1,𝑖 (𝑐) denote the corresponding
judgment from human annotator 𝐻 1 . Round 1 computes agreement
across all metrics:

𝐴1 (𝑐) =

𝑀
Ö
𝑖=1

⊮[𝐸𝑖 (𝑐) = 𝑀1,𝑖 (𝑐)]

(2)

where 𝐴1 (𝑐) = 1 indicates complete agreement across all 𝑀 metrics.
Conversations with complete agreement proceed directly to ground
truth: G𝑖 (𝑐) = 𝐸𝑖 (𝑐) = 𝑀1,𝑖 (𝑐) for all 𝑖.
Conversations with any disagreement (𝐴1 (𝑐) = 0) are escalated
to Round 2. A second human annotator 𝐻 2 provides independent
judgments 𝑀2,𝑖 (𝑐) for all metrics on the escalated conversation.
Ground truth is then established through majority voting:
(
1 if 𝐸𝑖 (𝑐) + 𝑀1,𝑖 (𝑐) + 𝑀2,𝑖 (𝑐) ≥ 2
G𝑖 (𝑐) =
(3)
0 otherwise
This formulation guarantees that ground truth reflects agreement of at least two of three evaluators for every metric on every
conversation. The efficiency gain arises from the observation that
complete agreement, while relatively rare at the conversation level
(13.2% in our experiments), allows substantial reduction in perconversation annotation effort.
The complete procedure is formalized in Algorithm 3 (Appendix A). The expected annotation cost per conversation is 1 + (1 − 𝑝)
human evaluations, where 𝑝 is the Round 1 complete-agreement
rate, compared to 2 evaluations under a standard two-annotator protocol. More significantly, LLM-based evaluation is computationally
inexpensive (<1 second per conversation), shifting the cost structure dramatically: the primary expense becomes Round 2 human
annotation of disagreement cases only.

3.5

LLM-as-a-Judge Evaluation with Tiered
Metrics

The LLM judge evaluates conversations across 13 quality metrics
organized into three priority tiers (full definitions in Appendix B):
BLOCKER metrics (𝑤 𝐵 = 10.0) individually fail the evaluation,
P0 metrics (𝑤 𝑃 0 = 5.0) affect query resolution, and P1 metrics
(𝑤 𝑃 1 = 2.0) affect experience quality. Two additional metrics are
monitored but excluded from evaluation decisions.

KDD ’26, Jeju, Korea,
Disha, Jason Whang, and Manikandarajan Ramanathan

Figure 2: Iterative consensus mechanism. Conversations with full Round 1 agreement bypass Round 2 entirely, reducing
annotation cost while maintaining consensus quality for disagreement cases.

For each conversation 𝑐, the LLM judge produces judgments
𝐸 (𝑐) = (𝐸 1 (𝑐), . . . , 𝐸𝑀 (𝑐)) ∈ {0, 1}𝑀 along with natural language
reasoning. The prompt, optimized using DSPy [3], instructs the
LLM to evaluate each dimension against explicit criteria before rendering binary judgments. The severity score aggregates violations
weighted by tier:
∑︁
∑︁
∑︁
𝑆 (𝑐) = 𝑤 𝐵 ·
𝐸𝑖 (𝑐) + 𝑤 𝑃 0 ·
𝐸𝑖 (𝑐) + 𝑤 𝑃 1 ·
𝐸𝑖 (𝑐) (4)
𝑖∈B

𝑖 ∈ P0

𝑖 ∈ P1

where B, P0 , P1 denote the BLOCKER, P0, and P1 metric sets
respectively.

3.6

Let 𝜃𝑖 denote the ground truth baseline failure rate for metric
𝑖. A metric exhibits statistically significant regression if 𝐿𝑖 > 𝜃𝑖 ;
that is, we are 95% confident the true failure rate exceeds the established baseline. The evaluation result aggregates metric-level
results according to tier:

Decision =


Fail




 Fail


Investigate



 Pass


if ∃𝑖 ∈ B : 𝐿𝑖 > 𝜃𝑖
if |{𝑖 ∈ P0 : 𝐿𝑖 > 𝜃𝑖 }| ≥ 3
if ∃𝑖 ∈ P0 : 𝐿𝑖 > 𝜃𝑖
otherwise

(6)

Wilson Interval Decision Framework

Thorough evaluation requires distinguishing true quality regressions from sampling variation. A system showing 5% failure rate
on 100 test cases might have a true failure rate anywhere from 2%
to 10%; declaring this a regression relative to a 4% baseline would
be premature. We employ Wilson score intervals [11] to establish
confidence bounds that inform statistically rigorous decisions.
For a test corpus of 𝑛 conversations with 𝑋 observed failures on
metric 𝑖, the point estimate 𝑝ˆ𝑖 = 𝑋 /𝑛 has associated Wilson lower
bound:
√︃
𝐿𝑖 =

𝑧 2 − 𝑧 𝑝ˆ𝑖 (1−𝑝ˆ𝑖 ) + 𝑧 2
𝑝ˆ𝑖 + 2𝑛
𝑛
4𝑛 2

(5)
𝑧2

1+ 𝑛
−1
where 𝑧 = Φ (1 − 𝛼/2) is the critical value for confidence level
1 − 𝛼. We use 𝛼 = 0.05, yielding 95% confidence intervals.

This framework ensures that any BLOCKER regression fails
evaluation, accumulated P0 regressions trigger rejection, isolated
P0 issues prompt investigation without blocking, and P1 issues
alone permit passing. The statistical grounding prevents both false
alarms from sampling noise and missed detections from inadequate
power.

4 EXPERIMENTS
4.1 Experimental Setup
The system under test is a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
system that serves user queries through a pipeline of retrieval, ranking, generation, and safety components. This compound architecture exemplifies modern enterprise AI systems where localization
decisions affect multiple interacting components.

KDD ’26, Jeju, Korea,
On Recursive Resolution: Scalable Ground Truth for Self-Improving AI Systems

Table 1: Alignment with consensus ground truth (%). The LLM
judge achieves reliability comparable to human annotators,
with strongest performance on objective safety metrics.
Metric

𝐻1

LLM Judge

𝐻2

BLOCKER
Courteous
PII
On Topic
Offensive Language

99.6
100.0
99.5
99.7

99.1
99.9
99.9
100.0

98.4
100.0
98.3
98.4

P0
Knowledgeable
Helpful
Intent Understanding
Relevant Response

84.4
75.2
75.6
86.3

87.6
78.8
73.6
84.4

81.2
87.5
81.3
84.0

P1
Easy to Understand
Concise
Efficient

93.5
90.1
72.0

88.7
93.0
73.0

88.7
88.0
87.3

We evaluated the system across three locale-specific test suites.
The synthetic conversation generator produced 1,946 multi-turn
conversations with equal distribution across five user archetypes,
averaging 7.53 turns per conversation. After quality filtering, 1,397
conversations formed the evaluation corpus. For each additional
locale, the generator produced a locale-specific test suite of 555
conversations.
The LLM judge used prompts optimized through DSPy. Round 1
annotation employed 20 human annotators over 2.5 days. Round 2
annotation employed 8 human annotators over 3 days to resolve
1,213 disagreement cases (86.8% of conversations required Round 2).
Ground truth was established through majority voting as described
in Section 3.4.

4.2

Ground Truth Quality

Table 1 presents alignment between each evaluator and the consensus ground truth. The LLM judge achieves 99%+ alignment
on BLOCKER metrics, where evaluation criteria are unambiguous and safety is paramount. For subjective P0 metrics, alignment
ranges from 73.6% (Intent Understanding) to 87.6% (Knowledgeable),
comparable to individual human annotators. Notably, 𝐻 2 achieves
higher alignment on several P0 metrics, reflecting the value of
seeing disagreement cases that highlight evaluation ambiguity.
The alignment patterns reveal an important property: disagreement concentrates on inherently subjective dimensions. Metrics
like Efficient (“Did the conversation require excessive turns?”) admit legitimate disagreement even among careful human annotators.
The LLM judge’s alignment on these metrics (73.0%) falls within the
range of human inter-annotator agreement, suggesting that lower
alignment reflects genuine ambiguity rather than evaluator failure.

Table 2: Baseline pass rates (%) on synthetic data, establishing
thresholds for regression detection.
Metric

Pass %

Metric

Pass %

Courteous
PII
On Topic
Offensive Language
Knowledgeable
Easy to Understand

99.9
100.0
99.9
100.0
79.3
95.1

Helpful
Efficient
Intent Understanding
Relevant Response
Concise

54.5
53.6
58.2
87.3
94.8

(99.9%–100% pass rate), validating system safety. P0 metrics reveal
improvement opportunities: Helpful (54.5%) and Intent Understanding (58.2%) indicate that roughly half of conversations fail to fully
address user needs.
The two-round mechanism achieved substantial efficiency gains.
Under the baseline approach (two annotators per conversation
with consensus resolution), evaluating 1,946 conversations would
require approximately 7,672 hours based on extrapolation from our
prior experience (3,600 turns requiring 1,885 annotator-hours). Our
approach required 481 hours: 325 hours for Round 1 plus 156 hours
for Round 2. This represents a 15.95× reduction in annotation effort
while increasing test coverage from 3,600 to 14,653 evaluated turns,
a 307% improvement. This efficiency gain translates to significant
cost savings per evaluation cycle and enables continuous evaluation
frequency.

4.4

Recursive Resolution: Complete Cycle
Evidence

The system was applied to evaluate the RAG system across three
locale-specific datasets. We present two case studies demonstrating
complete recursive resolution cycles where all five layers operated
in sequence.
Case Study 1: Content Format Divergence. During the evaluation
process for the second locale-specific dataset, the LLM judge flagged
synthetic conversations with significantly elevated Unknowledgeable failures. Layer 2 root cause analysis clustered 89% of these
failures, with semantic analysis of the LLM judge’s reasoning revealing that responses lacked locale-specific information for a given
content domain.
Quantitative investigation by Layer 3 identified the root cause:
domain-specific help content in this locale was stored in a separate
“domain-specific help collection” rather than the standard database
collection queried by the system. This locale’s knowledge base
contained only 297 documents compared to 431 in the baseline
locale (a 31% gap). However, 130 additional documents relating
to the domain existed in the alternate format, bringing potential
coverage to 427 documents (99% of baseline coverage).
Layer 3 proposed a targeted remedy: modify the system’s retrieval call to query both collection formats:

Baseline Performance and Efficiency

collections = {HelpDB𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑒 , DomainHelp𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙 }

Table 2 presents the system’s performance on the ground truth
corpus, establishing baseline failure rates 𝜃𝑖 for the Wilson interval framework. BLOCKER metrics show near-perfect performance

Layer 4 validated the fix through shadow evaluation on 200
domain-specific synthetic conversations, showing Knowledgeable
improvement from 58.3% to 79.1% (+20.8 percentage points) with

4.3

(7)

KDD ’26, Jeju, Korea,
Disha, Jason Whang, and Manikandarajan Ramanathan

acceptable latency increase (p95: 1.2s → 1.4s). Evaluation on the
full locale test set showed a 42% reduction in failed Q&A conversations for this domain.
Critically, Layer 5 generalized this finding: the meta-learner
recorded the pattern “locale expansion may introduce content format divergence for domains with global vs. regional help architectures” and added proactive content format audits to the evaluation
checklist. This heuristic was applied during the subsequent locale
expansion, where similar format divergence was identified and addressed before evaluation rather than after, preventing a regression
that would have otherwise required a second remediation cycle.
Case Study 2: Systematic Knowledge Gaps. The third locale’s evaluation on 555 synthetic conversations demonstrated the Wilson
interval framework’s ability to distinguish actionable regressions
from noise. Table 3 (Appendix C) presents the complete analysis.
The system issued a Pass-with-Investigation decision based
on two failing P0 metrics. Layer 2 analysis revealed that Unknowledgeable failures were 2× the baseline rate (55.1% vs. 27.2%), with
variation by content domain ranging between 33% and 86%. Semantic clustering of the LLM judge’s reasoning identified six systematic
failure themes: (1) inability to access user account details, (2) inability to provide specific information (prices, dates), (3) lack of
knowledge about regional restrictions and edge cases, (4) inability
to answer temporal questions (“how long,” “when exactly”), (5) no
visibility into temporary changes or account status, and (6) context
loss across conversation turns.
Layer 3 classified these into two categories: content gaps (themes
1–4, addressable through knowledge base expansion) and capability limitations (themes 5–6, requiring engineering roadmap items).
This triage, which distinguishes actionable content issues from
longer-term capability gaps, exemplifies how the recursive resolution architecture converts evaluation signals into differentiated
remediation strategies.

5

DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK

Limitations. Ground truth quality depends on annotator expertise; domain-specific training remains essential. The Wilson framework assumes metric independence, which may not hold; the thirdlocale analysis found 50% overlap between Unhelpful and Unknowledgeable failures. Layer 3 remedies require human approval; fully
autonomous remediation remains future work. Our evaluation focused on English; multilingual extension requires validation.
Future Directions. Current evaluation identifies that issues exist
without pinpointing which component is responsible. Componentlevel evaluation will assess individual components (e.g., retriever,
ranker, generator) for precise root cause attribution. Other modalities like voice will also adapt the framework, addressing ASR error
propagation and prosodic information loss.

6

CONCLUSION

We presented iterative consensus synthesis, an algorithm that breaks
the ground truth bootstrapping problem by treating LLM-human
agreement as a free signal. This selective escalation reduces annotation effort by 15.95× while achieving multi-annotator reliability.

Combined with Wilson interval decisions and a recursive resolution architecture, the approach enables self-improving evaluation
at scale. These results show that scalable, statistically rigorous evaluation of compound AI systems is achievable, enabling continuous
quality monitoring that would otherwise be prohibitively expensive.

REFERENCES
[1] Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion,
Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon,
et al. 2022. Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI Feedback. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.08073 (2022).
[2] Dallas Card, Peter Henderson, Urvashi Khandelwal, Robin Jia, Kyle Mahowald,
and Dan Jurafsky. 2020. With Little Power Comes Great Responsibility. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.06595 (2020).
[3] Omar Khattab, Keshav Santhanam, Xiang Lisa Li, David Hall, Percy Liang, Christopher Potts, and Matei Zaharia. 2023. DSPy: Compiling Declarative Language
Model Calls into Self-Improving Pipelines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03714 (2023).
[4] Hyunwoo Kim, Jack Hessel, Liwei Jiang, Ximing Lu, Youngjae Yu, Pei Zhou,
Ronan Le Bras, Malihe Alikhani, Gunhee Kim, Maarten Sap, and Yejin Choi.
2023. SODA: Million-scale Dialogue Distillation with Social Commonsense
Contextualization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10465 (2023).
[5] Xuechen Li, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Carlos Guestrin, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. 2023. AlpacaEval:
An Automatic Evaluator for Instruction-following Language Models. https:
//github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca_eval.
[6] Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang
Zhu. 2023. G-Eval: NLG Evaluation using GPT-4 with Better Human Alignment.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16634 (2023).
[7] Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah
Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al.
2023. Self-Refine: Iterative Refinement with Self-Feedback. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 36 (2023).
[8] Pararth Shah, Dilek Hakkani-Tür, Gokhan Tür, Abhinav Rastogi, Ankur Bapna,
Neha Nayak, and Larry Heck. 2018. Bootstrapping a Neural Conversational Agent
with Dialogue Self-Play, Crowdsourcing and On-Line Reinforcement Learning. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. 41–51.
[9] Shai Shalev-Shwartz. 2012. Online Learning and Online Convex Optimization.
Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning 4 (2012), 107–194.
[10] Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A Smith, Daniel
Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. Self-Instruct: Aligning Language
Models with Self-Generated Instructions. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 13484–13508.
[11] Edwin B Wilson. 1927. Probable Inference, the Law of Succession, and Statistical
Inference. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 22, 158 (1927), 209–212.
[12] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu,
Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. 2023. Judging LLM-as-a-Judge with MT-Bench and Chatbot Arena. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, Vol. 36. 46595–46623.

KDD ’26, Jeju, Korea,
On Recursive Resolution: Scalable Ground Truth for Self-Improving AI Systems

A

ALGORITHM: TWO-ROUND GROUND
TRUTH SYNTHESIS
Algorithm 1: Two-Round Ground Truth Synthesis
Input: Corpus C, LLM judge evaluator 𝐸, annotator pools 𝐴1 , 𝐴2
Output: Ground truth labels G
1: Initialize G ← ∅, D ← ∅, E ← ∅, M1 ← ∅
2: for each 𝑐 ∈ C do
3: E[𝑐 ] ← 𝐸 (𝑐 )
⊲ LLM judge on all 𝑀 metrics
4: M1 [𝑐 ] ← 𝐴1 (𝑐 )
⊲ Human annotator Round 1
5: if E[𝑐 ] = M1 [𝑐 ] then
6:
G [𝑐 ] ← E[𝑐 ]
⊲ Full agreement
7: else
8:
D ← D ∪ {𝑐 }
⊲ Escalate to Round 2
9: for each 𝑐 ∈ D do
10: m2 ← 𝐴2 (𝑐 )
⊲ Human annotator Round 2
11: for 𝑖 = 1, . . . , 𝑀 do
12:
G𝑖 [𝑐 ] ← majority(E𝑖 [𝑐 ], M1,𝑖 [𝑐 ], m2,𝑖 )
13: return G

Inefficient: The conversation requires excessive turns to resolve.
Spelling_errors: The bot’s response contains spelling or grammar
errors.
Monitored Metrics are tracked but excluded from evaluation.
Unempathetic: The bot fails to acknowledge user emotions or
frustration.
Prompt_injection: The user attempts to manipulate bot behavior
through adversarial prompting.

C

THIRD LOCALE EVALUATION DETAILED
ANALYSIS
C.1 Wilson Interval Results
Table 3 presents the complete Wilson interval analysis for the third
locale dataset evaluation on 555 conversations.
Table 3: Third locale Wilson interval analysis (𝑛 = 555,
𝛼 = 0.05). Two P0 metrics failed, triggering Pass-withInvestigation decision.
Metric

Tier

% Fail

𝐿𝑖

𝜃𝑖

Status

Figure 3: Two-round iterative consensus procedure. Round 1
identifies LLM judge–annotator agreement. Only disagreements proceed to Round 2 for majority voting.

PII
Off Topic
Offensive
Discourteous

BLOCKER
BLOCKER
BLOCKER
BLOCKER

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.9

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.3

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.8

Pass
Pass
Pass
Pass

B

Unknowledgeable
Unhelpful
Intent Understand.
Non-relevant

P0
P0
P0
P0

55.1
72.1
61.8
15.0

50.9
68.1
57.6
12.1

27.2
62.6
59.8
23.3

Fail
Fail
Pass
Pass

Inefficient
Verbose

P1
P1

78.0
15.3

74.3
12.5

69.2
9.0

Fail
Fail

COMPLETE METRIC DEFINITIONS

This appendix provides complete definitions for all 13 LLM judge
metrics, organized by priority tier.
BLOCKER Metrics (weight 𝑤 𝐵 = 10.0) represent violations
that individually fail evaluation.
Off_topic: The bot discusses matters outside the system’s scope.
A conversation passes if all bot responses remain within system
topical boundaries.
Offensive_language: The bot uses inappropriate, offensive, or
harmful language including profanity, slurs, or demeaning characterizations.
Discourteous: The bot is rude, dismissive, or disrespectful to the
user, including interrupting or ignoring stated concerns.
PII_exposure: The bot inappropriately reveals, requests, or handles personally identifiable information.
P0 Metrics (weight 𝑤 𝑃 0 = 5.0) affect whether the user’s query
is successfully resolved.
Unknowledgeable: The bot provides incorrect or outdated information.
Unhelpful: The bot fails to address the user’s actual need, even if
responses are polite and factually accurate.
Intent_understanding: The bot misinterprets what the user is
asking.
Non_relevant_response: The bot’s response does not relate to the
current conversation context.
P1 Metrics (weight 𝑤 𝑃 1 = 2.0) affect experience quality without
determining resolution.
Hard_to_understand: The bot’s response is confusing or poorly
structured.
Verbose: The bot’s response is unnecessarily long.

C.2

Failure Theme Analysis

Semantic clustering of the LLM judge’s reasoning identified six
systematic failure themes:
(1) Account Access: Inability to access user account details
(2) Specific Information: Inability to provide specific information (prices, dates)
(3) Regional Knowledge: Lack of knowledge about regional
restrictions and edge cases
(4) Temporal Questions: Inability to answer temporal questions (“how long,” “when exactly”)
(5) Dynamic Content: No visibility into temporary changes
or account status
(6) Context Retention: Context loss across conversation turns
(intent failures)
Layer 3 classified themes 1–4 as content gaps (addressable through
knowledge base expansion) and themes 5–6 as capability limitations
(requiring engineering roadmap items).

D

WILSON INTERVAL DERIVATION

The Wilson score interval provides a confidence interval for a
binomial proportion that performs well across all sample sizes and
success rates, unlike the normal approximation which fails near
boundaries and with small samples.

KDD ’26, Jeju, Korea,
Disha, Jason Whang, and Manikandarajan Ramanathan

Starting from the score test, we seek values of 𝑝 for which the
observed proportion 𝑝ˆ = 𝑋 /𝑛 is not significantly different from 𝑝.
The score statistic is:
𝑝ˆ − 𝑝
𝑧 = √︁
(8)
𝑝 (1 − 𝑝)/𝑛
Setting |𝑧| ≤ 𝑧𝛼/2 and solving for 𝑝 yields the Wilson interval.
Squaring both sides:
𝑧2 =

(𝑝ˆ − 𝑝) 2
𝑝 (1 − 𝑝)/𝑛

(9)

Rearranging:
𝑧 2 𝑝 (1 − 𝑝) = 𝑛(𝑝ˆ − 𝑝) 2
Expanding and collecting terms in 𝑝:
(𝑛 + 𝑧 2 )𝑝 2 − (2𝑛𝑝ˆ + 𝑧 2 )𝑝 + 𝑛𝑝ˆ 2 = 0

(10)

(11)

Applying the quadratic formula yields the Wilson interval bounds:
√︁
(2𝑛𝑝ˆ + 𝑧 2 ) ± 𝑧 4 + 4𝑛 ˆ
𝑝𝑧 2 (1 − ˆ
𝑝)
𝑝=
(12)
2
2(𝑛 + 𝑧 )
Which simplifies to the form presented in the main text. For our
application with 𝛼 = 0.05, we use 𝑧 = 1.96.

