Evaluating Governed LLM-Driven ML Experimentation:
Lifecycle, Provenance, and Failure Metrics
Dowling Wong

dowling.wong@kit.edu
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Karlsruhe, Germany

Abstract

1

Autonomous ML experimentation agents can report task improvements without showing whether their actions were bounded, auditable, or reproducible. We present a governed harness for LLMdriven ML experimentation in which a control plane, not the manager, owns trial lifecycle, edit-scope validation, keep/discard authority, and an append-only ledger. The ledger records proposal,
patch reference, run log, parsed metric, decision, provenance IDs,
and failure taxonomy for every trial, making governance properties measurable alongside task metrics. We evaluate the same contract across six ML nodes: a ResNet scientific node with a largescale replication, a synthetic logistic-regression node, two public
OpenML tabular nodes, an MLAgentBench vectorization adapter,
and a real LM-training node. Provenance completeness is a structural invariant of the control plane — it holds by construction —
and the 1,445 governed trials serve as its empirical certificate: 100%
completeness on every node, including high-failure campaigns and
protocol-contamination cases detected through reproducibility hashes.
Matched ungoverned counterfactuals quantify what the invariant
buys: 86% of ungoverned trials leave no ledger record. Memory ablations are used only as diagnostic probes: they reveal node-specific
behaviour in proposal repetition, invalid outcomes, and worker
failure, rather than establishing a general memory-performance
claim. The contribution is a method for treating governance metrics – provenance completeness, lifecycle classification, scope enforcement, and failure taxonomy coverage – as evaluation criteria
for autonomous ML experimentation systems.

Autonomous ML experimentation needs evaluation criteria for the
experimental process, not only the final task score. A higher validation AUC does not reveal whether the agent edited only allowed
files, whether failed trials were preserved, whether no-op patches
were rejected, whether keep/discard decisions were made by an external verifier, or whether the system repeatedly attempted knownbad ideas. Without explicit governance metrics, none of those properties are observable — and for scientific ML, observability of process determines whether an autonomous experiment has auditability: a traceable, reproducible record of every decision and its evidence.
This paper proposes a governance-metric evaluation protocol
for autonomous ML experimentation and a harness that instantiates it. The central question is not only did the metric improve? but
did the agent behave in a bounded, auditable, and reproducible way?
In the Agent = Model + Harness decomposition [15], manager and
harness together form a compound AI system [19]: the model proposes actions while the harness supplies execution boundaries, state
tracking, and verification. We instantiate this as a governed control plane: a manager proposes one bounded change, a worker materialises the patch and run artifacts, and the control plane owns
lifecycle, scope validation, metric parsing, keep/discard decisions,
memory updates, and append-only records — none delegated back
to the agent.
The protocol reports six governance metrics alongside the task
metric: acceptance rate (AR), invalid-action rate (IR), repeated-bad
rate (RBR), provenance completeness, artifact-reference completeness, and a failure taxonomy. These make process behaviours inspectable in the audit record: invalid edit attempts, missing metrics,
repeated degraded proposals, no-op patches, stale pending trials,
and unauditable decisions.
We validate the protocol across six ML nodes and 1,445 governed trials. Stated up front: 100% provenance completeness is not
an empirical discovery but a structural invariant — it holds by construction of the control plane (Section 3.4). What the trials contribute empirically is certification of the invariant across heterogeneous task types, worker classes, and failure regimes: the same
contract transfers to six nodes unchanged, surfaces total worker
failure and bounded-proposal exhaustion, detects protocol contamination through reproducibility hashes, and classifies every outcome explicitly. A matched ungoverned counterfactual quantifies
what governance buys: without the control plane, 43 of 50 trials
(86%) leave no ledger record, and a total-failure campaign is indistinguishable from one that never ran (Section 5.3). Memory ablation serves as a diagnostic governance probe: summary context
reduces repeated-bad rate on ResNet-trigger but does not transfer

CCS Concepts
• Computing methodologies → Artificial intelligence; • Software and its engineering → Software testing and debugging; •
General and reference → Evaluation.

Keywords
agentic AI evaluation, autonomous ML experimentation, governed
harness, control plane, append-only ledger, memory ablation, failure taxonomy, reproducibility, bounded execution
ACM Reference Format:
Dowling Wong. 2026. Evaluating Governed LLM-Driven ML Experimentation: Lifecycle, Provenance, and Failure Metrics. In Proceedings of KDD
Workshop on Evaluation and Trustworthiness of Agentic AI (KDD ETAAI’26).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 21 pages.

KDD ETAAI’26, Jeju Island, Republic of Korea
2026.

Introduction

KDD ETAAI’26, August 9, 2026, Jeju Island, Republic of Korea

to the synthetic node, confirming that this response is node- and
interface-specific rather than a general property of memory format.
Four contributions follow:
• governance metrics as first-class evaluation criteria for autonomous ML experimentation — acceptance, invalid-action,
repeated-bad, provenance completeness, artifact-reference
coverage, and failure taxonomy — assigned by the control
plane and validated structurally (Section 4.5);
• a governed control-plane protocol separating proposal, execution, validation, and keep/discard authority, with the manager as a replaceable component;
• an append-only audit schema recording proposal, patch, run
log, parsed metric, decision, and failure category for every
trial, validated across private, synthetic, public OpenML, and
MLAgentBench-adapter nodes, three memory modes, and
dedicated stress campaigns — together with a matched ungoverned counterfactual in which 86% of trials leave no ledger
record;
• a real LM training stress case (autoresearch_linux) demonstrating governance integrity under high failure rates: the
no-memory arm produces 100% runtime_error failures on
this specific task and interface configuration, yet all 240 trials are classified with complete provenance, showing that
control-plane governance is independent of the cause of failure.

2

Background and Related Work

The key distinction of this paper is that we evaluate the harness
that governs the agent loop—lifecycle states, scope enforcement,
provenance, and failure classification—not only the model that proposes edits.
ML-agent benchmarks and code-space exploration. AIDE [10]
is the closest academic system: both use LLMs to propose atomic
code changes evaluated by a hard-coded metric, but they differ
fundamentally in where lifecycle authority lives. AIDE is a coupled optimisation loop — search policy, evaluator, and solution
summarisation share state inside a single process — and uses inmemory tree nodes as its solution store. There is no append-only
external ledger, no pending-trial guard, and no typed failure taxonomy; if the process crashes, in-progress solutions are unrecoverable and mid-trial divergence is invisible. AIDE has no editablepath whitelist: any code change can be proposed without scope enforcement. The present work inverts this design: the control-plane
contract is fixed and externally visible; the manager and worker are
replaceable without altering governance; every outcome—whether
kept, discarded, or crashed—produces an immutable typed audit
record before the next trial begins. The editable-path whitelist is a
precondition guard, not a post-hoc filter.
MLAgentBench [8], MLE-bench [4], FML-bench [20], and MLGym [12] address a different evaluation target: they ask did the
agent improve performance on this task? This paper asks did the harness guarantee that every trial was bounded, classified, and provenancetracked, regardless of outcome? The two questions are complementary rather than competing. This paper wraps an MLAgentBenchstyle task (NumPy vectorization speed) as the mlagentbench_vec.

Dowling Wong

node, demonstrating that any task expressible as a NodeSpec receives the same governance coverage, but the governance evaluation is independent of task-metric outcome. SHARP [2] governs reproduction of existing experiments; this paper governs autonomous
generation of new ones.
Experiment tracking, AutoML, and NAS. Trackers such as
MLflow and Weights & Biases [1, 18] record outcomes after a run
exists but do not govern the agent loop or classify invalid edit
attempts before training. AutoML and neural architecture search
systems [6, 9] optimise within predefined search spaces; they are
not designed to audit self-directed exploration, explain why a proposed change was kept or discarded, or expose lifecycle diversity.
This paper makes the opposite tradeoff: a narrower set of controlled nodes with complete per-trial provenance.
Harness engineering and governance. The harness engineering literature independently validates this framing [3, 7, 11, 15,
17]: Trivedy frames the harness as everything around the model,
including tools, sandboxes, memory, middleware, and execution
hooks. Böckeler argues that trust in agent output requires constraining the solution space with computational guides and feedback sensors. This paper is not another task benchmark; it is a governance layer into which any benchmark task can be wrapped via
a NodeSpec contract. The node specification is a computational
guide; the pending-trial guard and state machine are computational
sensors; memory injection is an inferential guide; the repeated-bad
detector is an inferential sensor. Agent memory and scaffolding
frameworks [5, 14] inform the design of context-resident memory
injection and reflective self-improvement, but do not provide an
evaluation protocol for governed autonomous experimentation.

3

Governed Control Plane

The system is a governed harness for autonomous ML experimentation. The manager proposes an experimental change; the worker
materialises a patch and run artifacts. The control plane validates
scope, executes the lifecycle, parses metrics, assigns a kept, discarded, or failed-invalid decision, updates memory, and appends
the authoritative ledger record. Managers and workers are replaceable components; the control plane contract is fixed.
A worked trial. Before the full abstraction stack, we trace one
governed trial end to end, drawn from the ResNet-trigger case
study of Section 5.1. (i) Proposal: the manager emits one bounded
change — summary, rationale, target parameter, intended effect —
and the control plane assigns it a proposal provenance ID. (ii) Scope
validation: the worker materialises a patch touching only train.py,
the single whitelisted file; a patch touching frozen data or split
logic would terminate here as invalid_edit_scope, before any
training runs. (iii) Execution under guard: the control plane writes
a pending-guard file, then the worker runs training; a crash here
would leave a stale guard that forces a failed_invalid record at
the next campaign start rather than a silent gap. (iv) Metric parse
and decision: the parser extracts val_auc and the control plane —
not the manager — compares it against the current best (this campaign improves 0.7747 → 0.7827 over 20 trials); an improvement is
kept, a valid non-improvement discarded. (v) Ledger append: exactly one immutable JSONL record is appended — proposal text,

Evaluating Governed LLM-Driven ML Experimentation: Lifecycle, Provenance, and Failure Metrics

Table 1: Five auditability desiderata for governed agentic experimentation.
Desideratum

Operational meaning

D1. Bounded edit scope

The agent cannot change protected benchmark,
data, or evaluation files.
Every proposed attempt is recorded, including
invalid proposals and crashes.
Acceptance or rejection is decided by fixed
control-plane rules, not by the agent.
Each recorded attempt links to patch, configuration, run, metric, and decision evidence.
Aggregate governance claims can be recomputed from the ledger without re-running training.

D2. Complete attempt accounting
D3. Independent adjudication
D4. Provenance linkage
D5. Recomputability

Manager
replaceable

prompt_manager
LangGraph
baseline
proposal

Repeated poor behaviour
No ground truth for intermediate choices
Deployment and scope
safety
Long-horizon failure accumulation
Benchmark
reproducibility

Harness mechanism
Append-only
memory
+
repeated-bad detector
Decision authority separated
from manager; provenance IDs
per trial
NodeSpec whitelist, no-op
guard, pending-trial guard
State
machine;
terminal
kept/disc./failed_inv.
NodeSpec YAML, deterministic
patch bridge, seeded replicates

memory
context

Alignment with Agent Evaluation Criteria

Table 2 maps the Evaluation and Trustworthiness of Agentic AI
workshop concerns to the harness mechanisms and metrics reported
in this paper.

3.2

Manager, Worker, and Replacement
Principle

The manager generates proposals (summary, rationale, target, intended effect). The worker executes bounded actions (patch + run
artifacts). The control plane owns authority: validity, state transitions, budget, memory updates, provenance IDs, and final decision.
This separation is the replacement principle: any manager backend
— baseline heuristic, prompt_manager, LangGraphManager, or an
AIDE-style tree-search — can be swapped without changing the
governance contract. Two worker implementations span the reproducibility spectrum: LocalWorker applies “Change PARAM from

LocalWorker
ClawWorker
patch + log

Node
parsed metric

NodeSpec YAML

resnet, lr_synth
openml_*, mlab.
autoresearch

trial lifecycle state machine

JSONL — never overwritten

trial_id · patch_ref
decision · provenance

s

ve
impro

pending guard
executing valid, worse
pending

export

Evaluation & Reporting

Invalid-action rate

patch reference and hash, raw-log reference, parsed metric, decision, failure category if any, and five provenance IDs — the guard
is deleted, and the next budget slot may open. All 1,445 trials in this
paper, including all failures, follow exactly this path; the only variation is which guard or comparison produces the terminal state.
To make auditability concrete, we operationalise it through the
five desiderata in Table 1. These are not claimed to exhaust every
possible failure mode of agentic experimentation, nor to be statistically independent axes. They define the minimum operational
conditions needed for the claims in this paper to be inspectable. In
particular, complete attempt accounting and provenance linkage
are related but distinct: the former asks whether every attempted
budget slot appears in the ledger, while the latter asks whether
each recorded attempt carries enough evidence to inspect it.

3.1

Append-only Ledger

com-

Artifact manifest

scope validation
lifecycle state machine
keep / discard decision
provenance ID assignment
memory context update

one record per trial

Repeated-bad rate

Failure taxonomy

worker packet

fixed contract

Reported metric

Provenance
pleteness

Worker
replaceable

Control Plane

Table 2: Workshop evaluation concerns mapped to harness
mechanisms.
Evaluation concern

KDD ETAAI’26, August 9, 2026, Jeju Island, Republic of Korea

sco

pe

/ cr
ash

kept

discarded

failed_
invalid

acceptance · IR · RBR
provenance · failure taxonomy

Figure 1: System architecture and trial lifecycle. Replaceable components (manager, worker, node) are interchangeable without changing the governance contract; the control plane contract is fixed across all six nodes and every
manager backend tested in this paper. The control plane
owns scope validation, lifecycle transitions, keep/discard decisions, provenance ID assignment, and memory context updates. The state machine inset (bottom right) shows that
every opened budget slot produces exactly one terminal
record—kept, discarded, or failed_invalid—appended to
the append-only ledger before the next slot may open.
X to Y” directives with no external dependencies; ClawWorker invokes an external coding-agent path for free-form proposals, routing structured proposals through a deterministic constant-patch
bridge that requires only Ollama.

3.3

Benchmark Node Inventory

Table 3 lists the six nodes reported in this paper. The control-plane
contract is identical across all nodes: the only per-node configuration is the NodeSpec YAML (editable paths, frozen paths, run
command, metric parser, and budget range).

3.4

Trial Lifecycle

Each trial follows the fixed lifecycle shown in Figure 1 (state machine inset). Every opened budget slot must produce a kept, discarded
, or failed_invalid audit object.
The control plane writes a pending guard before worker execution, making mid-trial crashes auditable. A scope validator checks
the patch against the NodeSpec whitelist before training begins:
patches touching frozen files are rejected, recorded, and prevented
from corrupting node state. The append-only JSONL ledger stores,

KDD ETAAI’26, August 9, 2026, Jeju Island, Republic of Korea

Dowling Wong

Table 3: The six benchmark nodes. All nodes share the same control-plane contract; only the NodeSpec YAML differs. Direction:
max = maximise metric, min = minimise.
Node

Task type

Worker

Metric

Dir

Purpose in evaluation

resnet_trigger
lr_synthetic
openml_credit_g
openml_bank_mkt
mlagentbench_vec.
autoresearch_linux

Waveform classification
Logistic regression
Tabular classification
Tabular classification
NumPy convolution
LM pretraining

Claw
Local
Local
Local
Local
Claw

val_auc
val_score
val_auc
val_auc
speed_score
val_bpb

max
max
max
max
max
min

Primary case study; memory ablation substrate
Cross-node transfer check; dependency-free
Governance transfer to public tabular node
Governance transfer with visible task improvement
Benchmark compatibility probe
Real-task stress case; governance under high failure rate

Table 4: Trial lifecycle state machine. The pending guard
is a file written before executing and deleted on any
terminal transition; its presence at campaign start raises
PendingTrialError, preventing concurrent writes to the
append-only ledger.
From state

To state

Condition

pending
executing

executing
kept

executing
executing

discarded
failed_invalid

executing

failed_invalid

Pending guard written; worker starts
Metric parses; beats current best; patch diff
retained
Metric parses; does not beat current best
Scope violation, runtime error, missing metric, no-op patch, or precondition failure
Mid-trial crash detected via stale pending
guard at next campaign start

Terminal states: kept, discarded, failed_invalid. All three produce a complete
ledger record. Recovery tool: scripts/recover_pending.py.

per trial: proposal summary and rationale, patch and log references, parsed metrics, validity status, decision, failure category,
provenance IDs, and reproducibility hashes.
Table 4 formalises the lifecycle. The key invariant is that every
opened budget slot produces exactly one terminal record — there
are no silent completions or hanging trials.
Lifecycle invariant. A trial begins in pending, then enters executing. It ends in exactly one terminal state: kept, discarded, or
failed_invalid. The control plane maintains the following invariant:
For every budget slot that enters executing, the control plane
appends exactly one terminal record—kept, discarded, or
failed_invalid—to the append-only ledger before the next
slot may open. No slot is silently skipped; no slot produces
more than one record; no record is overwritten or deleted.

Enforcement has two paths. Normal path: the pending guard is
written before the worker starts and deleted on the terminal transition; any deviation raises an error before the ledger append. Crashrecovery path: if the process crashes mid-trial, the guard file persists; at the next campaign start PendingTrialError is raised, the
stale guard is inspected via scripts/recover_pending.py, and a
failed_invalid record is appended before any new trial begins.
Neither path allows a budget slot to close without a ledger record.
The invariant is structural rather than empirical: it holds by construction of the control-plane code, not because nothing crashed
during the reported experiments. The 100% provenance completeness observed across all 1,445 trials is its empirical certificate.

3.5

Failure Taxonomy and Metric Validation

Failure labels are assigned by the control plane at the terminal transition that writes the ledger record, not post hoc by the manager.

The submitted evidence uses five observed failed_invalid categories: invalid_edit_scope, no_op_patch, proposal_precondition
_failed, runtime_error, and node-level invalid_config. The
schema also supports metric_missing and edit_failed; those
labels do not appear in the primary 1,445-trial evidence set. Valid
non-improvements receive discarded, not failed_invalid. The
taxonomy is exhaustive for the current NodeSpec contract because
every terminal transition is produced by one of those guards or by
a parsed metric comparison. New nodes may add subcategories
only if they map to the same three terminal outcomes before the
ledger append. Structural validation uses forced stress campaigns,
paired deterministic reruns, kept-artifact re-execution, and rulebased relabeling from observable ledger fields. Readers who want
the taxonomy grounded before the aggregate results should consult Supplement Section E, which gives one concrete ledger example per category with its detection point and guard type.

3.6

Memory Modes and Decision Authority

The memory interface has three modes: no prior-trial context, appendonly summary, and rationale-augmented summary. The rationale
arm adds per-trial failure rationales and can truncate them with
rationale_max_tokens. The ablation is a diagnostic probe: it tests
whether the manager changes behavior when exposed to prior governed outcomes, and whether repeated-bad rate can detect that behavioral change. It is not treated as evidence that any memory format is generally superior.
The keep/discard decision lives in the control plane, not the
manager. A valid candidate is kept only if the configured metric
improves over the current best; a valid non-improving candidate
is discarded; an invalid candidate is failed_invalid with a specific failure category. This deterministic, externally-owned decision rule follows practitioner guidance for long-running agents:
harnesses should provide review loops and external checks rather
than letting the model own success criteria [13].

4

Evaluation Protocol

The evaluation asks whether an autonomous ML experimentation
loop is bounded, auditable, failure-aware, reproducible, and behaviorally affected by governance memory. Governance metrics are
primary; task-metric AUC is secondary evidence that the loop runs
end-to-end.

4.1

Benchmark Nodes

The primary scientific benchmark is resnet_trigger, a near-threshold
detector waveform classification task with frozen H5 corpora, split
logic, preparation code, and node metadata; workers may edit only

Evaluating Governed LLM-Driven ML Experimentation: Lifecycle, Provenance, and Failure Metrics

nodes/ResNet_trigger/train.py. The synthetic transfer benchmark,
lr_synthetic, is a pure-NumPy logistic-regression classifier run
via LocalWorker for dependency-free protocol validation; its data-

generation constants are frozen.
We also instantiate two public OpenML tabular nodes: openml
_credit_g (dataset 31) and openml_bank_marketing (dataset 1461).
They expose only bounded config.yaml hyperparameters and model
choices; dataset identity, target column, split logic, preprocessing,
parser, and NodeSpec metadata are frozen. These are governancetransfer substrates, not competitive AutoML benchmarks.
The mlagentbench_vectorization node wraps a NumPy-convolution
speed task as a bounded external-benchmark adapter. Benchmark
code, correctness checking, and parser logic are frozen; only config
.yaml edits over implementation choice and workload size are exposed. This is a compatibility probe, not a full MLAgentBench benchmark claim.
The sixth node, autoresearch_linux, is a GPT pretraining task
(nanochat, Wikitext-103) on NVIDIA L40S hardware. Its metric
is val_bpb (bits per byte, minimise), the paper’s only minimisedirection task. Workers may edit only training configuration; architecture, dataset pipeline, and parser are frozen. Each trial takes
approximately 6 minutes, so only none and summary arms are run:
4 independent seeds × 30 trials per arm = 240 trials.

4.2

Campaign Protocol

Controlled ablations are designed to start each campaign from a reset node state. The canonical scientific-node campaign uses prompt
_manager with structured state-aware hyperparameter proposals
and claw_style_worker with the deterministic patch path. The
memory ablation runs equal budgets across three memory modes
(none, summary, and rationale-augmented summary) under the
same node, budget, parser, and reset discipline. The OpenML campaigns use LangGraphManager, summary memory, and 20-trial budgets on each public node. The MLAgentBench adapter uses LocalWorker and a 30-trial budget. Stress campaigns exercise forced failure paths at 100% rate. For every trial, the control plane records
proposal, patch reference, raw log reference, parsed metrics, validity status, failure category, decision rationale, provenance IDs, and
reproducibility hashes.
Implementation and hardware environment. All cross-node
campaigns use deepseek/deepseek-v4-flash as the proposal manager via LangGraph, holding the model fixed to reduce the capability confound across nodes. Model-agnostic findings include provenance completeness, lifecycle correctness, and scope enforcement;
proposal-quality findings may be manager-specific. ClawWorker
campaigns ran on a server-class NVIDIA L40S host (CUDA 12.8,
Ubuntu 22.04, PyTorch 2.x); LocalWorker campaigns ran on a CPUonly host under Python 3.11. The corrected ResNet L40S replication resets all editable node files to a verified frozen baseline before
trial 1; older autoresearch_linux reset semantics are disclosed
separately in Sections 5.6 and 6. Patch and run-log references are
recorded with provenance IDs in the ledger; the public artifact contains the ledgers needed to recompute governance metrics, while
raw execution-host artifacts are not required for the paper’s primary claims. Full environment details and campaign IDs are provided in the supplement.

KDD ETAAI’26, August 9, 2026, Jeju Island, Republic of Korea

Table 5: Governance metric suite. Given 𝑁 trials, these metrics characterise process reliability independent of taskmetric outcome.
Metric

Formal definition

What it detects

Acceptance
rate
(AR)
Invalid rate (IR)

|kept|/𝑁

Repeated-bad rate
(RBR)
Provenance
completeness
Artifact-reference
coverage

Repeated-bad proposals /𝑁

Valid improving
edits
Unevaluable
trials
Redundant failure modes
Independent
reproducibility
Ledger-level evidence traceability

Failure taxonomy

4.3

|failed_invalid|/𝑁

Trials with all five IDs /𝑁
Patch/log refs and hashes
for materialized runs; classified records for pre-run failures
Counts
per
FailureCategory

Classified,
not
hidden, failures

Memory Ablation Design

As a diagnostic probe, the pre-stated behavioral hypothesis is:
RBR(none) > RBR(summary) > RBR(rationale)
where RBR is repeated-bad rate: the fraction of proposals repeating
the same edit target and mechanism as a prior rejected trial without a new corrective rationale. Rationale-linked memory should
reduce repeated-bad proposals more than raw summaries because
it provides targeted failure signals rather than history noise [3, 11,
14, 16].
Two manager configurations are tested on ResNet-trigger: a deterministic prompt manager (design-constrained negative — roundrobin makes memory structurally irrelevant) and a LangGraph manager calling qwen2.5-coder:7b at temperature 0.7 with an explicit
AVOIDANCE RULE. All LangGraph proposals are parsed into structured parameter-change fields and applied via the deterministic
patch bridge, eliminating coding-agent dependencies. Three ResNettrigger replicates are run at budget 10; a four-arm verbosity ablation with 50-token rationales tests whether rationale length drives
the result. The same three-arm LangGraph ablation is repeated on
lr_synthetic as a cross-node transfer check.
Large-scale replication (NVIDIA L40S). To obtain variance
estimates and test the pre-stated ordering, a third ablation configuration runs on an institutional GPU cluster: 3 memory modes ×
5 independent seeds × 15 trials = 225 total trials. The manager is
deepseek-v4-flash; the worker is qwen2.5-coder:7b at temperature 0.2. Each seed resets train.py before trial 1. Per-trial SHA256 context hashes verify that memory accumulates across the 225trial ledger.

4.4

Governance Metrics

Failure labels are control-plane-assigned. The categories observed
in the submitted evidence include: runtime_error, invalid_edit
_scope, no_op_patch, proposal_precondition_failed, and nodelevel invalid_config. The schema also supports metric_missing
and edit_failed, although those labels are not part of the primary 1,445-trial evidence set. Valid-but-non-improving trials receive degraded_metric and are classified discarded, not failed

KDD ETAAI’26, August 9, 2026, Jeju Island, Republic of Korea

_invalid. A campaign with high invalid rate but 100% provenance
completeness is more interpretable than one with unexplained score
changes and no audit trail.

4.5

Metric Validation Probes

We run three lightweight validation probes for the governance metrics. First, two reruns of the MLAgentBench vectorization adapter
test whether the same NodeSpec contract continues to produce
complete lifecycle records under repeated runs. Second, a re-execution
script rebuilds kept-trial state from cumulative patch references
and reruns selected kept trials where the underlying execution artifacts are available. Third, we estimate structural relabeling agreement by computing Cohen’s 𝜅 between control-plane-assigned labels and an independent rule-based relabeler applied to structurally
observable fields only (scope-validation flags, patch presence, traininginitiation signals, execution status). On a stratified sample of 50
failed_invalid trials spanning the observed validation categories,
the structural relabeler achieves 𝜅 = 0.830 (95% CI [0.703, 0.958]).
This is a structural consistency check, not a human inter-rater study.
The remaining discordant records are edge cases where the ledgerlevel structural evidence does not distinguish the precise workerside failure without consulting the referenced artifact file. Full human inter-rater validation remains future work.

Dowling Wong

Table 6: Real-worker scientific-node case study
(kdd_resnet_scientific_20,
ResNet-trigger,
prompt_manager, claw_style_worker, budget=20).
Field

Value

Kept / disc. / failed-invalid
Non-kept categories

4 / 5 / 11
5 × degraded_metric; 11 × proposal
_precondition_failed
0.20 / 0.55
1.00 (20/20)
1.00 (20/20)
1.00 (11/11 precondition failures classified)
1.00 (9/9 valid runs)

Acceptance / invalid rate
Provenance completeness
Decision record completeness
Failure evidence completeness
Patch refs/hashes for materialized
valid runs
Initial / best val_auc
Baseline seed noise (5 seeds)

0.7747 / 0.7827 (+0.008022)
mean 0.785, bootstrap 95% CI of mean [0.775,
0.798]

they can corrupt node state. Provenance is complete for all 20 records
(100%).
The net AUC gain (+0.008022) remains within the baseline seed
interval and should be treated as secondary evidence that the loop
runs correctly, not as an optimisation claim.

5.2

Cross-Node Governance Transfer

Table 7 consolidates all six nodes into a single governance view.
The central finding is that provenance completeness is 100% on every node without exception — including the 120-trial none-arm total failure and the s2 anomaly on autoresearch_linux, and across
5 Results
all three lifecycle outcomes (kept, discarded, failed-invalid).
Results are presented in governance-first order. All numbers derive
Public tabular nodes. openml_credit_g and openml_bank
from the primary campaign ledgers in experiments/ledgers/; the
_marketing test whether governed keep/discard/fail decisions
submitted artifact also includes development and smoke ledgers
transfer to public tabular substrates (LangGraph manager, sumthat are excluded from the paper totals. All governance metrics
mary memory, b20 and b30 budgets). Both nodes expose only
(acceptance rate, invalid rate, repeated-bad rate, provenance combounded config.yaml edits; dataset, split, preprocessing, and
pleteness) are recomputable from the archived ledgers without reparser code are frozen. Provenance completeness is 1.00 across all
running any training; no GPU is required to verify the primary
460 trials combined. openml_bank_marketing shows visible taskclaims. The primary paper-relevant campaign set comprises 1,445
metric improvement (mean best AUC 0.9295 at b20, 0.9341 at b30;
governed trials, indexed in the supplement. Across the primary set,
95% CI [0.9337, 0.9345] at b30, 𝜎=0.0005), while openml_credit
the harness runs one real-worker scientific case study (resnet_trigger), _g is a neutral transfer case (mean best AUC 0.7679 at b30). Inone dependency-free synthetic transfer node (lr_synthetic), two
valid rates increase with budget as bounded candidates are expublic OpenML tabular nodes, one MLAgentBench adapter, and
hausted or violate node-level configuration constraints; all such trione real LM training node (autoresearch_linux); supplemental
als are classified as proposal_precondition_failed or invalid
validation adds two one-trial stress campaigns. Together these cam_config rather than silently dropped.
paigns exercise kept, discarded, failed-invalid, invalid-scope, noMLAgentBench adapter. The 30-trial main campaign records
op, invalid-configuration, and repeated-bad outcomes under a sin2 kept, 4 discarded, and 24 failed-invalid trials with 1.00 provegle ledger schema.
nance completeness. The high failed-invalid count reflects exhausted
The section is staged as follows: the single-node case study (§5.1);
bounded candidates (proposal_precondition_failed), not benchthe six-node governance view (§5.2); stress campaigns and the governed- mark failure; the control plane classifies them explicitly rather than
vs-ungoverned counterfactual (§5.3); the memory-ablation diagnosinventing out-of-scope edits. Two additional 10-trial reruns add
tic and its large-scale replication (§§5.4–5.5); and the real LM-training
kept and discarded outcomes under the same NodeSpec contract,
stress case (§5.6). Throughout, AR denotes acceptance rate, IR inbringing the adapter evidence set to 50 trials with complete provevalid rate, and RBR repeated-bad rate (Table 5).
nance.

5.1

Real-Worker Scientific Node Case Study

5.3

Stress Campaigns and Ungoverned
Counterfactual

Table 6 summarises the 20-trial real-worker campaign on ResNettrigger. Four valid improving edits are kept, five valid non-improvements Table 8 documents forced failure paths and the synthetic-node govare discarded with patch/log references and metric evidence reernance validation.
tained in the ledger, and eleven impossible/no-op structured proThe scope-violation and no-op cases are backed by real ledger
posals are classified as proposal_precondition_failed before
records. The lr_synthetic campaigns confirm that the governance

Evaluating Governed LLM-Driven ML Experimentation: Lifecycle, Provenance, and Failure Metrics

(a) Per-node scorecard green=IR 0%, amber<20%, red 20%
ResNet-trigger
LR-Synthetic
OpenML Credit-G
OpenML Bank
MLAgentBench
Autoresearch Linux

Seeds

Trials

16
15
9
9
3
8

Kept (%)

245
450
230
230
50
240

44
8
13
13
28
6

Disc (%)
51
45
60
55
24
24

Fail (%)
5
46
26
32
48
70

Prov 100%

(b) Decision breakdown (green labels = 100% provenance)
Kept
Discarded
Failed

100

Trial proportion (%)

Node

KDD ETAAI’26, August 9, 2026, Jeju Island, Republic of Korea

80
60
40
20
0

er

igg

t-tr

Ne
Res

tic

the

Syn

LR-

n
Ope

ML

G

dit-

Cre

ank

LB

nM

Ope

ML

h

enc

ntB

Age

rch

sea

ore
Aut

Lin

ux

Figure 2: Governance overview across all six benchmark nodes. Top: per-node scorecard showing acceptance rate, invalid rate,
and provenance completeness. Bottom: stacked decision breakdown (kept / discarded / failed-invalid) per node. Provenance
completeness is 100% on every node regardless of task type, worker class, or failure rate—including the 120-trial total-failure
arm on autoresearch_linux.
Table 7: Cross-node governance summary. All nodes achieve 100% provenance completeness regardless of task type, worker
class, or failure rate. AR = acceptance rate, IR = invalid rate. ResNet-trigger appears as two rows because the campaign configurations differ fundamentally (prompt_manager vs. DeepSeek LangGraph; different memory modes). The autoresearch arms
are listed separately because their AR/IR differ categorically. LR arm-level variation is summarised as a range across three
memory modes.
Node
resnet_trigger (case study)
resnet_trigger (L40S, all arms)
lr_synthetic
openml_credit_g
openml_bank_marketing
mlagentbench_vec.
autoresearch (none arm)
autoresearch (summary)

Trials

AR%

IR%

Lifecycle outcomes

20
225
450
230
230
50
120
120

20.0
46.7
8.4
13.5
13.0
28.0
0.0
11.7

55.0
0.4
46.2
26.1
32.2
48.0
100.0
40.8

kept, disc., failed_inv.
kept, disc., failed_inv. (5 clean seeds verified)
kept, disc., failed_inv.
kept, disc., failed_inv.
kept, disc., failed_inv.
kept, disc., failed_inv.
failed_inv. only (total failure)
kept, disc., failed_inv.

Provenance completeness: 100% on every row above

Table 8: Stress campaigns and synthetic-node validation. Each row is a silent failure in a naive unguarded loop that the harness
makes visible.
Scenario

Campaign

Governed outcome

Evidence

Out-of-scope edit (frozen file touched)

kdd_stress_scope

Patch rejected before training; classified
invalid_edit_scope; git state unchanged
Training skipped; classified no_op_patch; empty
patch hash recorded
All three lifecycle outcomes in 5 trials; provenance
complete; NodeSpec YAML portable
Same manager/memory ablation runs on a different
node and worker type; all data-generation constants
remain frozen

1/1 trials; patch ref retained

No-op patch (byte-identical edit)

kdd_stress_noop

Synthetic baseline: lr_synthetic (logistic regression, LocalWorker)
Synthetic LangGraph transfer

lr_synth_baseline
lr_synth_lg_*

Invalid rate by node and control-plane failure category

120

Failure category

Invalid Config
Proposal Precondition Failed
Runtime Error

% of all trials in node

100
80

70%

60

48%

46%

40

32%

26%

20

5%

0

er

gg
et-tri

ResN

etic

ynth

LR-S

nML

Ope

t-G
Credi

nML

Ope

k

Ban

ch

Ben

gent

MLA

rch
esea

Linux

Autor

Figure 3: Failure taxonomy by node: share of
failed_invalid outcomes per FailureCategory. Composition is node-specific: autoresearch_linux concentrates
in runtime_error; tightly-constrained nodes accumulate
proposal_precondition_failed.
protocol operates on a different ML task and worker type without
code changes.
Ungoverned counterfactual. Every “the harness makes X visible” claim is only as strong as evidence that X would be invisible
without governance. Across the 1,445-trial primary campaign set,

1/1 trials; ledger record present
2 kept, 1 discarded, 2 failed-invalid; best val_score = 0.923
30/30 valid trials; RBR none/summary/rationale =
0.70/0.70/0.80

governance classification acts on the majority of outcomes: 242 trials (16.7%) produce runtime_error records that the pending-trial
guard and append-only ledger make auditable; 220 trials (15.2%)
are caught by precondition checks before reaching a valid run; 85
trials (5.9%) expose node-level invalid_config failures; 662 validbut-degrading trials (45.8%) are discarded by the control-plane decision rule. Without the pending-trial guard and append-only ledger,
each runtime_error would be a silent filesystem event with no trial
identifier, failure taxonomy, or provenance chain.
Table 9 reports matched governed/ungoverned pairs on two nodes
chosen to span the outcome spectrum; the visual companion is Supplement Fig. S8. The ungoverned arm is an independent matched
campaign, not a reconstruction from the governed ledger. It disables the pending-trial guard, failure-record appends, and blocking scope enforcement (Supplement B.1). A separate observation

KDD ETAAI’26, August 9, 2026, Jeju Island, Republic of Korea

log (*_ungoverned_obs.jsonl) records every executed trial and
is the denominator for ledger completeness.
The two nodes bracket the failure spectrum. The autoresearch
_linux row is an extremal, definitional case: when every trial fails
and failure appends are disabled, completeness is necessarily zero.
The informative mixed-outcome comparison is openml_bank_mkt,
where the ungoverned ledger retains only the 7 valid trials and
silently omits all 13 failures. Combined, 43 / 50 ungoverned trials
(86%) leave no ledger record versus 0 / 50 governed; the 95% bootstrap CI for ungoverned completeness lies strictly below 1.00 on
both nodes.

5.4

Memory Ablation as Diagnostic Probe

Memory context is evaluated as a diagnostic probe for governance
behaviour, not as a proposed optimisation method. The pre-stated
behavioral hypothesis is:
RBR(none) > RBR(summary) > RBR(rationale)
where RBR is repeated-bad rate: the fraction of proposals repeating the same edit target and mechanism as a prior rejected trial
without a new corrective rationale.
Full arm-level results appear in Supplement Table S4. We use
this ablation only as a diagnostic example for repeated-bad rate,
not as a proposed memory method.
Primary diagnostic finding. On ResNet-trigger, the summary
arm reduces repeated-bad rate in 2 of 3 replicates. A small crossnode lr_synthetic diagnostic (10 trials per memory mode) completes 30/30 valid LangGraph trials but does not reproduce the
pre-stated RBR ordering: rationale (0.80) exceeds both none and
summary (0.70), the reverse of the hypothesis. We interpret this
reversal as an anchoring effect — richer rationale context gives the
manager more prior failed patterns to fixate on rather than redirect from — confirming that repeated-bad rate is a useful per-node
diagnostic rather than evidence of a general memory-mode effect.
Verbosity ablation. Truncating rationale to 50 tokens does not
restore summary-level performance (RBR(C) = 0.778 = RBR(D) ≠
RBR(B) = 0.444). Rationale length is not the mechanism.

5.5

Large-Scale Memory Replication (NVIDIA
L40S, 225 Trials)

The large-scale L40S replication (design and models in Section 4.3:
3 memory modes × 5 independent seeds × 15 trials = 225 trials)
tests the full pre-stated ordering with variance estimates. Each seed
reset train.py to a verified clean baseline before its first trial; reset integrity is confirmed by a shared node_state_hash at trial 1
across all 15 campaigns.
L40S replication: memory arms outperform none. Across
all five clean seeds, mean best AUC follows none < summary ≈
rationale (0.899 vs. 0.939 and 0.941); the 0.002 difference between
the two memory arms is not treated as meaningful. Cross-seed
variability is lower for both memory arms, with 𝜎none = 0.009 vs.
𝜎summary = 𝜎rationale = 0.002 (4–5× reduction). Memory arms diverge from the no-memory arm by trial 5 and hold the gap through
trial 15 (Supplement Figs. S4 and S9). An earlier run with an unverified reset showed node-state divergence at seeds s4–s5; all five

Dowling Wong

seeds were rerun from a verified clean baseline. Provenance completeness: 100% across all 225 trials; the memory effect remains
node- and manager-specific.

5.6

Real LM Training Node: Governance Under
High Failure Rate

The autoresearch_linux node (GPT pretraining on Wikitext-103,
NVIDIA L40S, metric val_bpb) is reported as a governance stress
case under high failure rate. The none arm produces IR = 1.00 across
all 120 trials (four seeds); three of four summary seeds produce
valid improving trials (mean val_bpb reduction −0.062), while summary seed s2 also suffers total worker failure. Unlike the corrected
ResNet replication, these campaigns were not run with the later
frozen-baseline restore protocol, and the archived trial-1 hashes do
not verify a common start state across all arms and seeds. We therefore report s2 as an unresolved infrastructure/protocol anomaly,
not evidence for a memory effect. Across 240 trials including 151
runtime-error crashes, provenance completeness is 240/240 (100%):
every runtime_error event is machine-readable with zero silent
failures. The governance finding is classification fidelity under failure, not a general claim about memory-free managers.

6

Discussion and Limitations

Evidence strength. Table 10 separates demonstrated properties
from case-study findings and non-claims.
Limitations. Four limitations bound the claims. Scope of evidence:
six nodes broaden evidence beyond a single case study, but budgets are short and the RBR ordering holds in 2 of 3 ResNet replicates while reversing on lr_synthetic. Label validation: structural relabeling agreement (𝜅=0.830, Section 4.5) is a consistency
check, not a human study; two-rater validation and holdout-node
replication remain future work. Task metric and reset scope: the
ResNet best AUC falls within the 5-seed baseline min–max range
[0.771, 0.811] (bootstrap 95% CI of mean: [0.775, 0.798]), so AUC
gain is secondary evidence; the autoresearch_linux campaigns
predate the frozen-baseline restore protocol, so their s2 anomaly
is not used as memory-effect evidence. Human utility: the paper
shows that governance properties can be enforced and measured,
and what evidence is lost without them (Section 5.3) — not that governed ledgers improve human audit outcomes; a human-auditor
utility study (do reviewers with governed ledgers detect seeded errors faster?) is the natural next step.

7

Conclusion

Across 1,445 governed trials on six ML nodes, the control plane
classifies every outcome without silent corruption, with provenance
guaranteed by construction and certified empirically. Autonomous
ML experimentation should be evaluated on governance metrics—
provenance, lifecycle classification, scope enforcement, and failure
taxonomy—not only task metrics.

Evaluating Governed LLM-Driven ML Experimentation: Lifecycle, Provenance, and Failure Metrics

KDD ETAAI’26, August 9, 2026, Jeju Island, Republic of Korea

Table 9: Governed vs. ungoverned counterfactual comparison across two nodes. Ledger completeness = (trials with a ledger
record) / (trials that ran). Governed completeness is 1.00 by structural invariant (Section 3.4); ungoverned completeness falls
below 1.00 because failed_invalid trials are silently absent from the ledger. IR = invalid rate of the governed arm. 95% bootstrap CIs: 10,000 resamples, seed 42.
Node (profile)

𝑁

Governed

Ungoverned

autoresearch_linux
IR = 100%
openml_bank_mkt
IR = 55%

30

1.00 [1.00, 1.00]

0.00 [0.00, 0.00]

30 (100%)

Drops

20

1.00 [1.00, 1.00]

0.35 [0.15, 0.55]

13 (65%)

Interpretation
Total failure: ungoverned ledger is empty; campaign indistinguishable from one that never ran
Mixed outcomes: ungoverned ledger retains only
7 valid trials; 13 classified failures leave no trace

Combined: 43 / 50 ungoverned trials (86%) silently absent; 0 / 50 governed trials absent (100% completeness by structural invariant).

Table 10: Evidence strength by claim.
Claim

Evidence level

Control plane classifies kept / discarded Demonstrated
/ failed_invalid
Append-only ledger: 100% provenance Demonstrated
Guard failures visible in audit record
Demonstrated
Protocol transfers across node types
Demonstrated, 6 nodes
Repeated-bad rate diagnoses memory Mixed case study
sensitivity
Memory ordering none < summary ≈ Observed, 5 clean seeds
rationale (AUC)
Memory reduces cross-seed variance
Observed, 5 seeds
Rationale reduces repeated-bad rate

Not claimed

No-memory arm: 100% invalid (this Demonstrated, 4 seeds
task/interface)
Governance classifies total worker fail- Demonstrated
ure

Where
Secs 5.1–5.6
All nodes; Sec 5.2
Stress, Sec 5.3
Secs 5.2–5.6
ResNet 2/3; lr_synthetic
fails
Sec
5.5;
not
on
lr_synthetic
𝜎none =0.009 vs. 0.002 (4–
5×)
Non-monotonic; verbosity
ablation not supported
Sec 5.6
Sec 5.6

KDD ETAAI’26, August 9, 2026, Jeju Island, Republic of Korea

References

[1] Lukas Biewald. 2020. Experiment Tracking with Weights and Biases. https://
wandb.ai
[2] Joschka Birk, Gregor Kasieczka, Siddharth Mishra-Sharma, Benjamin Nachman,
Dennis Noll, and Tanvi Wamorkar. 2026. A Scientific Human-Agent Reproduction
Pipeline. arXiv:2604.18752 [hep-ph] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2604.18752
[3] Birgitta Böckeler. 2026. Harness Engineering for Coding Agent Users. Retrieved
May 2026 from https://martinfowler.com/articles/harness-engineering.html
[4] Jun Shern Chan, Neil Chowdhury, Oliver Jaffe, James Aung, Dane Sherburn,
Evan Mays, Giulio Starace, Kevin Liu, Leon Maksin, Tejal Patwardhan, Lilian
Weng, and Aleksander Madry. 2024. MLE-bench: Evaluating Machine Learning
Agents on Machine Learning Engineering. arXiv:2410.07095 [cs.CL] doi:10.48550/
arXiv.2410.07095
[5] Pengfei Du. 2026. Memory for Autonomous LLM Agents: Mechanisms, Evaluation,
and Emerging Frontiers. arXiv:2603.07670 [cs.AI] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2603.07670
[6] Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. 2019. Neural Architecture Search: A Survey. Journal of Machine Learning Research 20, 55 (2019), 1–21.
https://www.jmlr.org/papers/v20/18-598.html
[7] Mitchell Hashimoto. 2026. My AI Adoption Journey. Retrieved May 2026 from
https://mitchellh.com/writing/my-ai-adoption-journey
[8] Qian Huang, Jian Vora, Percy Liang, and Jure Leskovec. 2024. MLAgentBench:
Evaluating Language Agents on Machine Learning Experimentation. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning (Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 235). PMLR, Vienna, Austria, 20271–20309.
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/huang24y.html
[9] Frank Hutter, Lars Kotthoff, and Joaquin Vanschoren (Eds.). 2019. Automated
Machine Learning: Methods, Systems, Challenges. Springer, Cham. doi:10.1007/
978-3-030-05318-5
[10] Zhengyao Jiang, Dominik Schmidt, Dhruv Srikanth, Dixing Xu, Ian Kaplan,
Deniss Jacenko, and Yuxiang Wu. 2025. AIDE: AI-Driven Exploration in the Space
of Code. arXiv:2502.13138 [cs.AI] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2502.13138
[11] Ryan Lopopolo. 2026. Harness Engineering: Leveraging Codex in an AgentFirst World.
Retrieved May 2026 from https://openai.com/index/harnessengineering/
[12] Deepak Nathani, Lovish Madaan, Nicholas Roberts, Nikolay Bashlykov, Ajay
Menon, Vincent Moens, Amar Budhiraja, Despoina Magka, Vladislav Vorotilov,
Gaurav Chaurasia, Dieuwke Hupkes, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Tatiana Shavrina,
Jakob Foerster, Yoram Bachrach, William Yang Wang, and Roberta Raileanu.
2025. MLGym: A New Framework and Benchmark for Advancing AI Research
Agents. arXiv:2502.14499 [cs.CL] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2502.14499
[13] Prithvi Rajasekaran. 2026. Harness Design for Long-Running Application Development. Retrieved May 2026 from https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/
harness-design-long-running-apps
[14] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan,
and Shunyu Yao. 2023.
Reflexion: Language Agents with Verbal Reinforcement Learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS ’23, Vol. 36). Curran Associates, Inc., New Orleans, LA,
USA, 8634–8652. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
1b44b878bb782e6954cd888628510e90-Abstract-Conference.html
[15] Vivek Trivedy. 2026. The Anatomy of an Agent Harness. Retrieved May 2026
from https://www.langchain.com/blog/the-anatomy-of-an-agent-harness
[16] Chunlong Wu, Ye Luo, Zhibo Qu, and Min Wang. 2025. Meta-Policy Reflexion: Reusable Reflective Memory and Rule Admissibility for Resource-Efficient LLM
Agent. arXiv:2509.03990 [cs.AI] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2509.03990
[17] Justin Young. 2025. Effective Harnesses for Long-Running Agents. Retrieved
May 2026 from https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/effective-harnessesfor-long-running-agents
[18] Matei Zaharia, Andrew Chen, Aaron Davidson, Ali Ghodsi, Sue Ann Hong, Andy
Konwinski, Siddharth Murching, Tomas Nykodym, Paul Ogilvie, Mani Parkhe,
Fen Xie, and Corey Zumar. 2018. Accelerating the Machine Learning Lifecycle
with MLflow. IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin 41, 4 (Dec. 2018), 39–45. https:
//people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~matei/papers/2018/ieee_mlflow.pdf
[19] Matei Zaharia, Omar Khattab, Lingjiao Chen, Jared Quincy Davis, Heather
Miller, Chris Potts, James Zou, Michael Carbin, Jonathan Frankle, Naveen Rao,
and Ali Ghodsi. 2024. The Shift from Models to Compound AI Systems. https:
//bair.berkeley.edu/blog/2024/02/18/compound-ai-systems/
[20] Qiran Zou, Hou Hei Lam, Wenhao Zhao, Yiming Tang, Tingting Chen, Samson Yu, Tianyi Zhang, Chang Liu, Xiangyang Ji, and Dianbo Liu. 2025.
FML-bench: Benchmarking Machine Learning Agents for Scientific Research.
arXiv:2510.10472 [cs.CL] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2510.10472

Dowling Wong

Supplementary Material: Evaluating Governed LLM-Driven ML
Experimentation
Dowling Wong

dowling.wong@kit.edu
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Karlsruhe, Germany

Abstract
This supplement is a reproducibility appendix for the main paper.
It provides ledger schema, NodeSpec contract examples, controlplane pseudocode, extended experiment tables, failure taxonomy
with concrete ledger examples, campaign identifiers, hardware and
model environment, and notebook details. No central claim in the
main paper depends only on this supplement.
ACM Reference Format:
Dowling Wong. 2026. Supplementary Material: Evaluating Governed LLMDriven ML Experimentation. In Proceedings of KDD Workshop on Evaluation and Trustworthiness of Agentic AI (KDD ETAAI’26). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 11 pages.

A Reproducibility and Artifact Description
A.1 Artifact and Code Availability
The code and ledger evidence bundle is submitted as supplemental material and is publicly available at https://github.com/
dowlingwong/autoresearch_harness. The harness evidence snapshot used for the reported results is commit ff3717b (full SHA
in ARTIFACT_README.md). The camera-ready paper source is available at https://github.com/dowlingwong/A-Governed-Harnessfor-Auditable-LLM-Driven-ML-Experimentation; the submitted
source archive and PDF are the authoritative camera-ready version.
The harness is released under the MIT licence.
The artifact ZIP contains: src/ (control-plane source), configs/
nodes/ (node YAML specs), scripts/ (campaign runners), tests/
(test suite), experiments/ledgers/ (all paper trial records), nodes/
(per-node training code), paper_figures.ipynb (figure notebook),
artifact_manifest.json (campaign index), and ARTIFACT_README.
md (step-by-step instructions). The supplemental bundle intentionally excludes large/private execution artifacts: the two ResNet HDF5
data files and execution-host patch/run-log files are not needed
to recompute the reported governance metrics from the archived
ledgers.
The submitted artifact contains the harness code, node configurations, submitted ledgers, and the analysis notebook. Executionhost patch and run-log artifacts are referenced by sanitized relative
path fields and machine-readable provenance IDs in each ledger
record; the raw execution-host paths are not included in the public artifact.
The top-level artifact_manifest.json indexes the submitted
evidence bundle. Each trial record contains a trial identifier, campaign identifier, proposal summary/rationale, patch reference, rawlog reference, parsed metrics, terminal decision, failure category
KDD ETAAI’26, Jeju Island, Republic of Korea
2026.

where applicable, node-state hash, and provenance IDs for proposal, patch, run, metric, and decision objects. Reviewers can map
paper tables to ledgers under experiments/ledgers/ and then to
sanitized artifact references recorded in each ledger row.

A.2

Ledger Schema

Table S1: Core ledger fields. Terminal lifecycle states are
kept, discarded, and failed_invalid; failure labels are attached only where a control-plane guard or worker failure
produces a failure condition.
Field

Meaning

trial_id
campaign_id

Stable identifier for one budget slot.
Links rows to the campaign ID inventory in Section B.1.
Trial index within the fixed campaign budget.
Terminal
state:
kept,
discarded,
or
failed_invalid.
Control-plane label such as runtime_error,
invalid_edit_scope,
no_op_patch,
proposal_precondition_failed,
invalid_config,
metric_missing,
or
edit_failed;
valid-but-worse
trials
use
degraded_metric and are discarded.
Manager proposal text recorded before worker execution.
Patch artifact path and content hash when a patch is
materialised.
Worker run-log artifact path.
Machine-parsed task metrics used by the decision
rule.
Stable IDs for proposal, patch, run, metric, and decision objects.
Hash of node-local state used for reset and divergence auditing.

budget_index
decision
failure_category

proposal_summary,
proposal_rationale
patch_ref, patch_hash
raw_log_ref
parsed_metrics
provenance
node_state_hash

A.3

Dry-Run Commands

The harness can be exercised without Ollama or a GPU using dryrun mode:
# Smoke test --- 3 trials, synthetic metrics, no LLM or node
required
python3 scripts/run_campaign.py \
--node resnet_trigger --campaign-id smoke \
--budget 3 --dry-run
# LangGraph manager smoke test (stub LLM, no Ollama)
python3 scripts/run_campaign.py \
--node resnet_trigger --campaign-id lg_smoke \
--budget 2 --manager langgraph_manager \
--dry-run --llm-stub

KDD ETAAI’26, August 9, 2026, Jeju Island, Republic of Korea

python3 scripts/run_campaign.py \
--node resnet_trigger --campaign-id main \
--budget 5 --manager prompt_manager \
--memory-mode append_only_summary_with_rationale \
--node-root nodes/ResNet_trigger \
--model qwen2.5-coder:7b \
--host http://localhost:11434

A.4

Hardware and Model Environment

Large-scale ResNet and autoresearch_linux campaigns ran on
an institutional GPU cluster (NVIDIA L40S, CUDA 12.8, Ubuntu
22.04, PyTorch 2.x). Cross-node LangGraph campaigns use deepseek/deepseekv4flash through the OpenAI-compatible DeepSeek API
endpoint (DEEPSEEK_BASE_URL, default https://api.deepseek.com;
authenticated via DEEPSEEK_API_KEY); campaigns were run in May
2026. The ResNet L40S replication uses qwen2.5-coder:7b at temperature 0.2. The stochastic memory ablation uses qwen2.5-coder:7b
at temperature 0.7 with the explicit avoidance prompt and deterministic patch bridge. LocalWorker campaigns run under Python
3.11 on a CPU-only host.
Hosted API proposals may vary if the provider changes the served
model behind a fixed identifier. Exact proposal text is most reproducible from the submitted ledgers. Governance metrics remain recomputable from archived trial records without API access. No API
keys, account identifiers, or private endpoint secrets are included
in the artifact.

A.5

Bootstrap Confidence Intervals

A.7

Provenance and Artifact Completeness

Figure S1 shows per-node provenance completeness and artifactreference capture rates by decision type. Panel (a) confirms 100%
provenance completeness on all six nodes. Panel (b) shows that
lower artifact-reference capture rates for failed_invalid trials
are expected by design: trials that fail at the precondition stage
(before worker execution) produce no patch diff, and trials that fail
at runtime may produce no parsed metric. The provenance chain
itself (proposal → patch → run → metric → decision IDs) is always
complete regardless of the terminal outcome.
Provenance and artifact completeness
(a) Provenance chain completeness by node
(proposal patch run metric decision)

104
102

100%

100

100%

100%

100%

100%

100%

98

(b) Artifact capture rate by decision type
(lower rates for failed_invalid are expected by design)

100
95
90
85
Kept (n=236)
Discarded (n=662)
Failed Invalid (n=547)

80

96

er

g
-trig

Net

Res

every trial is auditable

105

100% target

Capture rate (%)

For a real campaign with a local Ollama model:

A divergence in the prefix across seeds indicates a reset failure
and invalidates the ablation comparison for that seed. The hash is
stored in every ledger record, so the check is replayable from the
submitted artifact without re-running any training code.

Provenance completeness (%)

# Memory ablation dry run (all three modes)
python3 scripts/run_memory_ablation.py \
--node resnet_trigger --budget 3 --dry-run

Dowling Wong

ic

het

ynt

LR-S

it-G

red

LC
nM

Ope

ank

LB
nM

Ope

ntB

Age

ML

h
ux
enc
Lin
rch
sea
ore

75

Prov.

Aut

chain

Raw

log

Patch

diff

rsed

ic pa

Metr

Figure S1: Provenance and artifact-reference completeness
across all 1,445 governed trials. (a) Provenance chain completeness is 100% on every node. (b) Artifact-reference capture rates by decision type: lower patch and metric rates for
failed_invalid are expected (pre-run failures produce no
patch; runtime failures produce no parsed metric).

A.8

Analysis Notebook

Seed-level bootstrap confidence intervals use 10,000 resamples with
random seed 42. Resampling is performed over seed-level best metrics, not individual trial records, so each interval reflects betweenseed variability.

The artifact bundle includes paper_figures.ipynb. The notebook
loads submitted campaign ledgers from experiments/ledgers/,
treats the append-only ledgers as the source of truth, and writes
derived outputs to paper/tables/ and paper/figures/. Install
dependencies and run:

A.6

uv pip install -e ".[dev,notebook]"
# then: Kernel -> Restart & Run All

Node-State-Hash Reset Verification

Each trial record contains a node_state_hash computed from the
SHA-256 digest of the node’s editable file set immediately before
the worker executes. This field allows independent verification that
every seed of a multi-seed ablation campaign started from an identical node state — a necessary condition for fair memory-mode
comparisons. For the L40S replication (Table S5), all five seeds produce hash prefix 9c0118f33fcb at budget_index=1:
python3 -c "
import json
for l in open('experiments/ledgers/<campaign_id>_trials.
jsonl'):
r = json.loads(l)
if r['budget_index'] == 1:
print(r['trial_id'], r['node_state_hash'][:12])
"

The notebook is an analysis convenience layer; the ledgers, not
rendered plots, are the evidence source.
Selected notebook outputs (after final L40S data
synchronisation): fig1_governance_overview, fig3_ir
_taxonomy, fig5_cross_node, fig6_provenance, fig7_openml,
and fig9_resnet_linux_ablation.
Retired or exploratory outputs (including the MLP synthetic diagnostic plot) should not be cited as submitted evidence unless the
main paper explicitly restores that node to the evidence set.

Supplementary Material: Evaluating Governed LLM-Driven ML Experimentation

KDD ETAAI’26, August 9, 2026, Jeju Island, Republic of Korea

B Extended Experiment Tables
B.1 Campaign ID Inventory
Table S2: Primary campaign identifiers for the 1,445-trial governed evidence set. One ledger file exists per listed seed. Campaign
IDs with ranges (e.g. s1–s5) denote five separate JSONL ledgers.
Campaign ID(s)

Node

Arm / mode

Seed(s)

Budget

kdd_resnet_scientific_20
deepseek_resnet_none_s1–s5
deepseek_resnet_append_only_summary_s1–s5
deepseek_resnet_append_only_summary_with_rationale_s1–
s5
deepseek_lr_none_b30_s1–s5
deepseek_lr_append_only_summary_b30_s1–s5
deepseek_lr_append_only_summary_with_rationale_b30_s1–
s5
deepseek_openml_cg_s1–s4
deepseek_openml_cg_b30_s1–s5
deepseek_openml_bm_s1–s4
deepseek_openml_bm_b30_s1–s5
mlagentbench_vectorization_main_30
deepseek_mlagentbench_s1, s2
deepseek_autoresearch_linux_none_s1–s4
deepseek_autoresearch_linux_append_only_summary_s1–s4

resnet_trigger
resnet_trigger
resnet_trigger
resnet_trigger

case study
none
summary
rationale

–
s1–s5
s1–s5
s1–s5

20
15
15
15

lr_synthetic
lr_synthetic
lr_synthetic

none
summary
rationale

s1–s5
s1–s5
s1–s5

30
30
30

openml_credit_g
openml_credit_g
openml_bank_marketing
openml_bank_marketing
mlagentbench_vec.
mlagentbench_vec.
autoresearch_linux
autoresearch_linux

summary
summary
summary
summary
adapter main
adapter rerun
none
summary

s1–s4
s1–s5
s1–s4
s1–s5
–
s1–s2
s1–s4
s1–s4

20
30
20
30
30
10
30
30

Table S3: Validation and counterfactual campaign identifiers reported outside the 1,445-trial headline total. Ungoverned counterfactual arms append only valid-trial records to the ledger by design; the full trial denominators are recorded in the paired
*_ungoverned_obs.jsonl observation logs (main-paper counterfactual table).
Campaign ID(s)

Node

Arm / mode

Seed(s)

Budget

kdd_stress_scope
kdd_stress_noop
lr_synth_baseline
lr_synth_lg_none
lr_synth_lg_summary
lr_synth_lg_rationale
kdd_cf_openml_gov
kdd_cf_openml_ung
kdd_cf_arlinux_gov
kdd_cf_arlinux_ung

resnet_trigger
resnet_trigger
lr_synthetic
lr_synthetic
lr_synthetic
lr_synthetic
openml_bank_marketing
openml_bank_marketing
autoresearch_linux
autoresearch_linux

scope stress
no-op stress
baseline manager
none
summary
rationale
governed (matched)
ungoverned (matched)
governed (matched)
ungoverned (matched)

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

1
1
5
10
10
10
20
20
30
30

KDD ETAAI’26, August 9, 2026, Jeju Island, Republic of Korea

B.2

Dowling Wong

LangGraph Memory Ablation Detail

Table S4: LangGraph memory ablation (qwen2.5-coder:7b, temp=0.7, avoidance prompt, deterministic patch bridge).
RBR = repeated-bad rate. Arm C tests whether rationale length drives Arm D’s result. The lr_synthetic rows use validation
score, not AUC.
Arm

Memory mode

RBR

Kept

Disc.

Best metric

A
B
D

Primary ablation — rep1, budget=10
none
summary
full rationale

0.78
0.44
0.78

1
4
1

9
6
9

0.7747
0.8212
0.7747

Baseline
Discovers TRAIN_FRACTION
Stuck on BATCH_SIZE

C

Verbosity ablation — same node/budget/model
short rationale (50 tok)

0.78

1

9

0.7747

Matches D, not B: length is not the cause

0.78
0.67
0.56

1
2
3

9
8
7

0.7747
0.7903
0.8220

Ordering fails in this replicate
Rationale arm best in rep2

Seed replication — rep2, budget=10
A
none
B
summary
D
full rationale

Observation

A
B
D

Budget replication — rep3, budget=20
none
summary
full rationale

0.84
0.79
0.84

2
3
1

18
17
15+2

0.8031
0.8150
0.7747

Ordering holds; finds TRAIN_FRACTION at T5
Stuck on TRACE_LEN

A
B
D

Cross-node transfer — lr_synthetic, budget=10
none
summary
full rationale

0.70
0.70
0.80

2
2
1

8
8
9

0.9230
0.9228
0.9227

Clean LocalWorker run
No RBR reduction on this node
Slightly higher RBR

Supplementary Material: Evaluating Governed LLM-Driven ML Experimentation

Cross-Node Acceptance and Invalid Rates

one governed harness, diverse ML tasks

0.8

ResNet / LR-Synthetic
MLAgentBench
OpenML
Autoresearch Linux

0.6

0.44

100

0.28

0.4
0.2

0.13

0.08

0.0

er

rigg

et-t

N
Res

ic

het

ynt
LR-S

LC

O

M
pen

0.13

it-G

red

ank

LB

nM

Ope

0.06
h

enc

ntB

Age
ML

(b) Invalid Rate by node (green=0%, amber<20%, red 20%)

120

Invalid Rate (%)

Figure S2 summarises acceptance rate (AR) and invalid rate (IR)
across all six nodes with 95% seed-level bootstrap confidence intervals. AR and IR vary substantially by node and manager interface. The governance claim is not that these rates are uniform, but
that the lifecycle classification and provenance record are correct
on every node regardless of the rates observed.

AR and IR across six nodes

(a) Acceptance Rate by node (95% CI, seed-level bootstrap)
Acceptance Rate (kept / N)

B.3

KDD ETAAI’26, August 9, 2026, Jeju Island, Republic of Korea

70%

60
40

er

rigg

et-t

N
Res

Au

32%

26%
5%

0

x

48%

46%

20

inu

hL

arc

se
tore

80

ic

het

ynt
LR-S

it-G

red

LC

nM

Ope

ank

LB

nM

Ope

h

enc

ntB

Age

ML

x
inu

L
rch
sea

ore

Aut

Figure S2: Cross-node acceptance rate (AR) and invalid rate
(IR). Bootstrap CIs use 10,000 seed-level resamples. Colour
denotes task family. AR and IR reflect proposal quality and
task difficulty, not governance failures.
LR-Synthetic memory ablation (150 trials, 5 seeds/arm)
(a) Mean AR ± 95% CI

bootstrap, n=5 seeds
Grand mean = 0.084

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

0.7

Acceptance Rate (per seed)

Acceptance Rate (kept / N)

0.6

No Memory

Summary

Summary+Rationale

governance transfers, memory does not

(b) Per-seed distribution

high variance, no detectable memory effect
Negative transfer finding:
memory does not improve AR
on LR-Synthetic

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

No Memory

Summary

Summary+Rationale

Figure S3: LR-synthetic memory ablation (150 trials, 5 seeds/arm). Mean AR and per-seed scatter show no detectable
memory effect. Governance transfers; memory format does
not.

B.5
0.96

Best val_auc (so far)

0.94

ResNet L40S Best-AUC Trajectory
ResNet L40S Best AUC Trajectory by Memory Mode
(thick = 5-seed mean; thin = individual seeds; verified clean reset)
No Memory
Summary
Summary+Rationale

0.941
0.939

0.92
0.90

0.899

0.88
0.86

B.4

LR-Synthetic Memory Ablation (Negative
Transfer)

Figure S3 shows the memory ablation on lr_synthetic. No memory arm produces a detectable improvement in acceptance rate: the
three arms are statistically indistinguishable across all five seeds.
This is an explicit finding reported in the main paper (Section 5.4),
not a framework failure — the control plane classifies every trial
correctly in all three arms. Memory format is interface-specific; it
does not transfer from the ResNet node to the synthetic logisticregression node.

2

4

6

8

Trial index

10

12

14

16

Figure S4: ResNet L40S best-AUC trajectory by memory
mode (3 modes × 5 seeds, verified reset). Thick: 5-seed mean;
thin: individual seeds. Memory arms diverge from the nomemory arm by trial 5 and hold the gap through trial 15,
consistent with the 4–5× variance reduction reported in the
main paper.

B.9

OpenML Dataset Statistics

The class imbalance in the bank-marketing dataset (88%) makes
acceptance rate a more informative primary metric than raw accuracy; the control plane’s keep rule (candidate > current best) is
applied to val_AUC, which is robust to imbalance. Both datasets
are publicly available on OpenML under the CC-BY licence.

KDD ETAAI’26, August 9, 2026, Jeju Island, Republic of Korea

B.6

Dowling Wong

Large-Scale L40S Replication

Table S5: Large-scale memory ablation (ResNet-trigger, NVIDIA L40S, 75 trials per arm = 3 modes × 5 seeds × 15 trials). Reset integrity confirmed by shared node_state_hash (9c0118f33fcb) at trial 1 across all 15 campaigns. 𝜎 is per-seed best-AUC standard
deviation. 95% CIs use 10,000 seed-level bootstrap resamples (seed 42). Manager: deepseek-v4-flash; worker: qwen2.5-coder:7b
at temperature 0.2.
Memory mode

Seeds

𝑁

Acc%

Inv%

Mean best AUC

95% CI

𝜎

5
5
5

75
75
75

17.3
64.0
58.7

0.0
1.3
0.0

0.899
0.939
0.941

[0.892, 0.907]
[0.937, 0.940]
[0.940, 0.943]

0.009
0.002
0.002

none
summary
rationale

B.7

Autoresearch Linux Per-Seed Results

Table S6: Autoresearch Linux node (NVIDIA L40S, deepseek-v4-flash manager, claw_style_worker, 4 seeds × 30 trials per arm).
AR = acceptance rate; IR = invalid rate; Gain = best − initial val_bpb (negative = improvement). Seed s2 of the summary arm
suffered total worker failure; task-metric gain summaries use s1/s3/s4. AR uses the main-paper definition |kept|/𝑁 .
Arm

Seed

Kept

Disc

Fail

AR

IR

Gain

none

s1
s2
s3
s4

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

30
30
30
30

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

—
—
—
—

summary

s1
s2†
s3
s4

4
0
5
5

17
0
18
22

9
30
7
3

0.13
0.00
0.17
0.17

0.30
1.00
0.23
0.10

− 0.0616
—
− 0.0607
− 0.0642

† s2 suffered total worker failure (27 runtime_error + 3 proposal_precondition_failed); no initial val_bpb was recorded. These campaigns predate the frozen-baseline
restore protocol, and the archived trial-1 hashes do not verify a common start state across all arms and seeds; s2 is therefore an unresolved infrastructure/protocol anomaly, not
memory-effect evidence. Governance correctly classified all 30 trials as failed_invalid.

B.8

OpenML Per-Budget Summary

Table S7: OpenML campaign summary by public node and budget. Seed-level bootstrap confidence intervals use 10,000 resamples (seed 42).
Budget

credit_g
bank_mkt

b20
b30
b20
b30

Seeds

Trials

AR%

IR%

Mean best AUC

95% CI

4
5
4
5

80
150
80
150

20.0
10.0
20.0
9.3

8.8
35.3
17.5
40.0

0.7671
0.7679
0.9295
0.9341

[0.7655, 0.7687]
[0.7667, 0.7688]
[0.9263, 0.9330]
[0.9337, 0.9345]

Table S8: OpenML dataset characteristics for the two public
classification nodes used in Section 5 of the main paper.

31
1461

Name
credit-g
bank-marketing

𝑁
1,000
45,211

Feats.
20
16

Task
Binary
Binary

Maj. cls.
70%
88%

0.932
0.930
0.928
Mean across seeds

0.926
0.924
0.922
0.918

OpenML Running-Best Trajectories

Figure S5 shows running-best val_AUC trajectories for both OpenML
nodes. The step function is monotonically non-decreasing because
the control plane accepts only valid improving trials — the keep
rule is enforced structurally, not by the manager. Individual seeds
(thin blue lines) and the 5-seed mean (red) show the variance compressed by the governed campaign discipline.

(b) Credit-G (9 seeds)
Mean across seeds

0.768

0.920

B.10

OpenML nodes (monotone by keep rule)

0.934

Running best val_AUC

ID

Running best val_AUC
(a) Bank Marketing (9 seeds)

Mean gain: +0.50pp
0

5

10

15

Trial index

20

25

30

Running best val_AUC

Node

0.766
0.764
0.762
0.760
0.758
Mean gain: +0.75pp

0.756
0

5

10

15

Trial index

20

25

30

Figure S5: OpenML running-best val_AUC trajectories
across all seeds. Monotone non-decrease is guaranteed by
the control-plane keep rule. (a) Bank Marketing; (b) CreditG.

Supplementary Material: Evaluating Governed LLM-Driven ML Experimentation

KDD ETAAI’26, August 9, 2026, Jeju Island, Republic of Korea

C Control-Plane Algorithm
C.1 Trial Lifecycle

One-trial-one-record discipline
(a) Trial decisions

deepseek_openml_bm_s1
Kept
Discarded
Failed Invalid

Decision

Algorithm S6 gives the pseudocode for one governed trial. The control plane is the only writer to the append-only ledger; the manager
never transitions state directly.

control plane owns keep/discard

(b) Running best (step = kept; dots = all valid trials)
Running best (control-plane owned)

1. Write a pending-guard file for this budget slot.
2. Call Manager.propose(memory context, node spec) → proposal.
3. Scope-check: if proposal touches any frozen path → reject.
4. No-op check: if patch is empty or byte-identical → reject.
5. Precondition check: validate proposal fields → reject if malformed.
6. Call Worker.execute(proposal, node spec) → patch + raw log.
7. If worker fails → record failed_invalid/runtime_error or
edit_failed and go to step 10.
8. Parse task metric from raw log.
9. If metric missing → failed_invalid/metric_missing. If metric
≤ current best → discarded. Else → kept; update current best.
10. Append one immutable ledger record (fields: proposal, patch ref, log
ref, metric, decision, failure category, provenance IDs, node-state
hash).
11. Delete pending-guard file.
12. Update append-only memory context from completed record.

Figure S6: Trial lifecycle pseudocode (one budget slot).
Steps 3–5 are pre-run guards: they prevent invalid edits from
corrupting node state and produce classified failure records before
any training occurs. Steps 7–9 are post-run classification: a valid
but non-improving trial becomes discarded, not failed_invalid.
The manager is not consulted at any classification step.

C.2

Control-Plane Trial Decision Timeline

Figure S7 illustrates the one-trial-one-record discipline on a representative campaign (OpenML Bank Marketing, seed 1). Every trial
produces exactly one terminal record. The running best (step function) advances only when the control plane accepts a valid improving trial; it never decreases. This monotone property is structural:
the keep rule candidate > current_best is evaluated and applied exclusively by the control plane.

C.5

Decision Rule

The decision function decide_trial() is purely functional with
no side effects. It receives the candidate metric, the current-best
metric, and a validity flag, and returns exactly one terminal state:

C.6

Memory Context Algorithm

The memory context is built by build_memory_context() and injected into the manager at each trial. Three modes produce qualitatively different inputs:

C.7

Repeated-Bad Rate Detection

The repeated-bad rate (RBR) is a governance metric that measures
how often the manager repeats the same edit target and mechanism as a prior rejected trial without providing a new corrective
rationale.

val_AUC

0.928
+0.66pp campaign gain

0.926
0.924
2.5

5.0

7.5

10.0

Trial index

12.5

15.0

17.5

20.0

Figure S7: Trial decision timeline for one governed campaign (OpenML Bank Marketing, seed 1, 20 trials). Top: pertrial decision colour (kept / discarded / failed_invalid). Bottom: running best val_AUC step function and per-trial metric dots. The keep/discard decision is owned by the control
plane, not the manager.
Definition. Let 𝑃𝑖 = (𝑡𝑖 , 𝑑𝑖 ) be the edit target and direction
of proposal 𝑖 (e.g., target = LEARNING_RATE, direction = increase).
Proposal 𝑖 is repeated-bad if:
(1) A prior proposal 𝑃 𝑗 , 𝑗 < 𝑖, had the same target 𝑡 𝑗 = 𝑡𝑖 and
direction 𝑑 𝑗 = 𝑑𝑖 ; and
(2) 𝑃 𝑗 received decision discarded or failed_invalid; and
(3) Proposal 𝑖 does not include a rationale that references the
prior rejection.
RBR = |{𝑖 : 𝑃𝑖 is repeated-bad}|/𝑁 where 𝑁 is the campaign budget.
Implementation. The detector in memory/similarity.py uses
Jaccard similarity on unigram token sets of proposal summaries to
identify near-duplicate proposals, then checks whether the candidate’s summary token set 𝑆𝑖 overlaps with any prior rejected proposal 𝑆 𝑗 above a threshold 𝜃 = 0.6:
Jaccard(𝑆𝑖 , 𝑆 𝑗 ) =

|𝑆𝑖 ∩ 𝑆 𝑗 |
≥𝜃
|𝑆𝑖 ∪ 𝑆 𝑗 |

Parameter direction is extracted by regex from the proposal rationale field (keywords: increase, decrease, reduce, raise, lower). Proposals that lack a detectable direction are not flagged.

C.8

Manager Prompt Template

The LangGraph manager (manager/langgraph_manager.py) builds
a single-turn prompt from five components at each trial. Below is
the template structure; bracketed tokens are filled at runtime.
You are a research manager proposing one bounded
hyperparameter change.
Node: [node_spec.name]
Description: [node_spec.description]
Metric to optimize: [metric_name] (direction: [direction])
Files you may instruct the worker to edit: [editable_paths]
Budget index (trial number): [budget_index]
Current best [metric_name]: [current_best_metric]
Editable values currently in [editable_file]:
PARAM_A = current_value_A
PARAM_B = current_value_B
...

KDD ETAAI’26, August 9, 2026, Jeju Island, Republic of Korea

C.3

Dowling Wong

Governed vs. Ungoverned Counterfactual Visual

Governed vs. Ungoverned Counterfactual (43/50 ungoverned trials = 86% silently absent)

Ledger completeness
(records / trials ran)

1.0

30

Governed
Ungoverned 1.00

1.00

0.8
0.6
0.35
[0.15,0.55]

0.4
0.2
0.0

kept
discarded
failed_invalid
ungov. ledger
(visible only)

30/30 silent
drops (100%)

25

Trial count

1.2

(b) Governed trial decisions
(hatched = ungoverned ledger records)

(a) Ledger completeness: governed vs. ungoverned

20

13/20 silent
drops (65%)

15
10
5

0.00
[0.00,0.00]

autoresearch_linux
(N=30, IR=100%)

0

openml_bank_mkt
(N=20, IR=55%)

autoresearch_linux
(N=30, IR=100%)

openml_bank_mkt
(N=20, IR=55%)

Figure S8: Governed vs. ungoverned counterfactual (visual companion to the main-paper counterfactual table). Left: ledger
completeness with 95% bootstrap CIs; the governed CI collapses to [1.00, 1.00] by structural invariant, while the ungoverned CI
lies strictly below 1.00 on both nodes. Right: governed trial decision timeline with silent-drop positions annotated. Combined:
43 / 50 ungoverned trials (86%) leave no ledger record.

C.4

ResNet L40S Per-Seed Panels
Acceptance (green) and Invalid (red hatched)
Rate by Arm & Seed 5 clean seeds

Rate (%)

60
50
40
30
20

Mean (5 seeds)

0.96

Best val_auc (per seed)

70

0.939
±0.002

0.94

0.941
±0.002

0.92
0.90

0.899
±0.009

0.88

10
0

Best AUC per Seed Memory Reduces Variance
(verified reset; mean ± annotated)

Acceptance rate (per seed)
Invalid rate (per seed)
Pooled 5-seed mean

80

No Memory

Summary

Summary+Rationale

0.86
No Memory

Summary

Summary+Rationale

Figure S9: ResNet L40S memory ablation across five clean
seeds with verified reset. Left: per-seed acceptance (green)
and invalid (red) rates. Right: per-seed best AUC, showing
𝜎none = 0.009 vs. 𝜎summary = 𝜎rationale = 0.002 (4–5× reduction).

# --- if memory_context is non-empty: --Prior trial memory:
[memory_context.context_text]
AVOIDANCE RULE (mandatory): Study the trial history
above carefully. Identify every hyperparameter that
was already tried in the same direction (e.g.
increasing BATCH_SIZE, reducing LEARNING_RATE) and
produced no improvement or a failure. You MUST NOT
propose the same parameter change in the same
direction again. Choose a DIFFERENT hyperparameter
or a DIFFERENT direction. If every direction for a
parameter has been explored, switch to a different
parameter entirely.

if validity flag is false (any pre-run or post-run guard fired) → return
failed_invalid with the guard’s FailureCategory.
elif candidate_metric > current_best_metric → return kept; update
current best to candidate_metric.
else → return discarded with failure_category = degraded_metric.
The function never raises an exception and never reads or writes the
ledger. All side effects (ledger append, memory update, best-metric
update) happen in the control-plane campaign loop after
decide_trial() returns.

Figure
S10:
Decision
(control_plane/decision.py).

rule

# --- if memory_context is empty: --No prior trial memory available.
Propose exactly one bounded experiment. Respond with
ONLY a JSON object (no markdown, no extra text):
"summary" -- short slug e.g. "reduce-lr-2e-4"
"rationale" -- one sentence on why this might help
"objective" -- full worker instruction:
"In FILE, change PARAM from X to Y.
Edit only FILE."
"param"
-- exact editable value name
"old_value" -- current value as listed above
"new_value" -- proposed replacement value
Constraints:
- edit only: [editable_paths]
- change exactly one listed value
- param must be one of the editable values above
- do not run the experiment; the harness runs it

pseudocode

Supplementary Material: Evaluating Governed LLM-Driven ML Experimentation

Mode: none
Return a context containing only the NodeSpec parameters (editable
symbols and their current values). No prior trial history is included. The
manager has no information about past proposals or outcomes.
Mode: summary
Append one line per completed trial in chronological order:
Trial {i}: {decision} - {proposal_summary}
metric: {parsed_metrics}
The manager receives the full history of proposals and outcomes, but
with no explanation of why each trial succeeded or failed.
Mode: rationale (summary + rationale)
Same as summary, plus per-trial failure rationale lines:

KDD ETAAI’26, August 9, 2026, Jeju Island, Republic of Korea

D NodeSpec Contract Specification
D.1 Schema
A NodeSpec is a JSON-serialisable YAML file under configs/nodes/.
The control plane reads it once at campaign start and treats it as
immutable for the duration of the campaign. Table S9 lists the required and optional fields.
Table S9: NodeSpec YAML field schema. All fields are required unless marked optional.
Field

Type

Meaning

name

string

description
editable_paths

string
list

The [AVOID: ...] warning is appended whenever the repeated-bad
detector flags the current trial as semantically repeating a prior failed edit
(see Section C.7). Rationale tokens can be truncated to a configurable
rationale_max_tokens limit (50 tokens in the verbosity ablation).

frozen_paths

list

run_command

string

metric_name

string

Figure
S11:
Memory
(memory/summarizer.py).

metric_direction

string

metric_parser

string

acceptance_rule

string

default_budget

object

setup_command

string

editable_symbols

list

failure_categories

list

Unique node identifier used as campaign
ledger key.
Human-readable node purpose.
Files the worker may edit; scope validator enforces this whitelist.
Files and directories the worker must
never touch; scope validator enforces
this blocklist.
Shell command executed by the worker
to train and produce output.
Key expected in parsed metric output
(e.g. val_auc).
maximize or minimize; determines the
keep/discard rule.
Python import path to the parser function (module:function).
Expression evaluated by decision
module (e.g. candidate_metric
>
current_best_metric).
Default
trials
and
max_wall_clock_hours
(both
optional at invocation time).
Optional pre-campaign setup (e.g. uv
sync).
Optional: specific named symbols inside
editable files (used by LocalWorker).
Exhaustive
list
of
valid
FailureCategory values for this
node.

Trial {i}: {decision} - {proposal_summary}
metric: {parsed_metrics}
rationale: {proposal_rationale}
[AVOID: repeated {target} change - prior rejection]

context

algorithm

The AVOIDANCE RULE is injected only when prior trial memory is non-empty (i.e., after the first trial). It operates on the memory context produced by the mode selected for that campaign arm.
In the none mode the rule is absent; in the summary and rationale
modes it is present and the manager is expected to honour it. The
RBR metric (Section C.7) measures empirical compliance.

C.9

Scope Validation

The control plane’s scope validator checks the file set touched by
the patch against the NodeSpec’s editable_paths whitelist and
frozen_paths blocklist. A patch is rejected if it touches any file
outside the whitelist or any file in the blocklist, regardless of the nature of the change. This fires before the worker executes training,
so frozen files (dataset pipelines, split logic, evaluation harness) are
never modified.

C.10

Crash-Recovery Path

If the process crashes mid-trial (e.g. OOM kill, host reboot), the
pending-guard file persists on disk. At the start of the next campaign run, PendingTrialError is raised. The operator runs:
python3 scripts/recover_pending.py --list
python3 scripts/recover_pending.py --inspect \
experiments/ledgers/<id>_pending.json
python3 scripts/recover_pending.py --mark-failed <id> \
--reason "OOM during training"

This appends a failed_invalid record for the stale trial before
any new trial begins, preserving the invariant that every opened
budget slot produces exactly one terminal ledger record. The guard
file is deleted only after the failure record is written.

D.2

Annotated Example: resnet_trigger

This is the primary scientific node. The worker may only edit train.py;
all other files including datasets, split logic, and architecture are
frozen.
name: resnet_trigger
description: >
Near-threshold detector waveform binary-classification
benchmark
with frozen H5 signal/noise traces and a single editable 1
D ResNet
training entrypoint.
editable_paths:
- train.py
frozen_paths:
- prepare.py
- resnet_1d.py
- signal_vacuum_sum_crop_4000x8000.h5
- noise_traces_4000x8000.h5
- artifacts/
- data/
run_command: >

KDD ETAAI’26, August 9, 2026, Jeju Island, Republic of Korea

~/anaconda3/bin/python3 train.py > run.log 2>&1
metric_name: val_auc
metric_direction: maximize
metric_parser: >
autoresearch.nodes.resnet_trigger.metric_parser:
parse_val_auc
acceptance_rule: candidate_metric > current_best_metric
default_budget:
trials: 50
max_wall_clock_hours: 12

The metric parser converts val_bpb to val_auc via 1−val_bpb
when both values are present, preferring the val_bpb reading. This
indirection allows the same governance infrastructure to handle
both maximise- and minimise-direction nodes.

D.3

Annotated Example: lr_synthetic

Dowling Wong

lists each category, its detection point, and a representative ledger
excerpt.

E.1

Concrete Ledger Records

The following records are drawn verbatim from the submitted ledgers
(provenance hash suffixes truncated for readability; full records are
in experiments/ledgers/). Each record shows the seven fields
that identify a trial’s terminal outcome. The metric_missing category has not been observed in any real campaign to date; all zerometric outcomes in the submitted artifact are classified as runtime_error
(the worker exits non-zero before the metric parser runs).
Kept (campaign kdd_resnet_scientific_20, trial-001):
{"trial_id": "kdd_resnet_scientific_20-trial-001",
"campaign_id": "kdd_resnet_scientific_20",
"budget_index": 1,
"decision": "kept",
"failure_category": null,
"proposal_summary": "lower-weight-decay",
"parsed_metrics": {"val_auc": 0.774711}}

This is the dependency-free transfer node. The worker edits train.py
but is further restricted to four named symbols; the data-generation
Discarded (campaign kdd_resnet_scientific_20, trial-002):
constants are frozen by scope enforcement and by the editable_symbols{"trial_id": "kdd_resnet_scientific_20-trial-002",
hint used by LocalWorker.
"campaign_id": "kdd_resnet_scientific_20",
name: lr_synthetic
description: >
Synthetic binary-classification node (NumPy logistic
regression).
Dependency-free governance-protocol validation.
editable_paths:
- train.py
editable_symbols:
- LEARNING_RATE
- REGULARIZATION
- N_EPOCHS
- BATCH_SIZE
frozen_paths:
- artifacts/
run_command: python3 train.py
metric_name: val_score
metric_direction: maximize
metric_parser: >
autoresearch.nodes.lr_synthetic
.metric_parser:parse_val_score
acceptance_rule: candidate_metric > current_best_metric
default_budget:
trials: 10
max_wall_clock_hours: 1

Adding a new node requires only a YAML file in configs/nodes/
and a registration entry in src/autoresearch/nodes/registry.py.
The control-plane contract (lifecycle, guards, ledger format) is identical.

E Failure Taxonomy with Concrete Examples
The control plane assigns a FailureCategory label at the terminal
transition that writes the ledger record. The taxonomy is exhaustive for the current NodeSpec contract: every failed_invalid
outcome maps to exactly one of the categories below. Table S10

"budget_index": 2,
"decision": "discarded",
"failure_category": "degraded_metric",
"proposal_summary": "small-dropout",
"parsed_metrics": {"val_auc": 0.773778}}

invalid_edit_scope (campaign kdd_stress_scope, trial-001):
{"trial_id": "kdd_stress_scope-trial-001",
"campaign_id": "kdd_stress_scope",
"budget_index": 1,
"decision": "failed_invalid",
"failure_category": "invalid_edit_scope",
"proposal_summary": "lower-learning-rate",
"parsed_metrics": null}

The scope guard fires before the worker executes; node state is
never modified and training never runs.
no_op_patch (campaign kdd_stress_noop, trial-001):
{"trial_id": "kdd_stress_noop-trial-001",
"campaign_id": "kdd_stress_noop",
"budget_index": 1,
"decision": "failed_invalid",
"failure_category": "no_op_patch",
"proposal_summary": "lower-weight-decay",
"parsed_metrics": null}

proposal_precondition_failed
(campaign
deepseek_autoresearch_linux_
append_only_summary_s1, trial-012):
{"trial_id":
"deepseek_autoresearch_linux_append_only_summary_s1-trial-012",
"campaign_id":
"deepseek_autoresearch_linux_append_only_summary_s1",
"budget_index": 12,
"decision": "failed_invalid",
"failure_category": "proposal_precondition_failed",
"proposal_summary": "reduce-total-batch-size-32768",
"parsed_metrics": null}

The precondition check fires when the manager produces a proposal whose field values fail validation (e.g. new_value is identical
to old_value, or a required field is absent). No worker call is made.
runtime_error
(campaign deepseek_autoresearch_linux_none_s1, trial-001):

Supplementary Material: Evaluating Governed LLM-Driven ML Experimentation

KDD ETAAI’26, August 9, 2026, Jeju Island, Republic of Korea

Table S10: Failure taxonomy: detection point, guard type, and representative ledger evidence. All examples are drawn from
real campaign ledgers in the submitted artifact; fields are formatted for readability.
Category

Fires at

Guard

Representative ledger evidence

invalid_edit_scope

Pre-run

Scope validator

no_op_patch

Pre-run

No-op guard

proposal_precondition_
failed

Pre-run

Precondition check

runtime_error

Post-run

Metric/exit check

invalid_config

Post-run

Node validator

metric_missing

Post-run

Metric parser

edit_failed

Post-run

Worker path

Campaign kdd_stress_scope, trial-001: proposal attempts to edit resnet_1d.py
(frozen); scope guard rejects; decision is failed_invalid; patch is never applied; node
state is unchanged.
Campaign kdd_stress_noop, trial-001: worker produces a patch that is byte-identical
to the current train.py; no-op guard rejects; decision is failed_invalid; training is
never executed.
Campaign deepseek_autoresearch_linux_append_only_summary_s2, trials 28–30:
manager produces malformed proposals after repeated runtime_error failures; precondition guard fires before worker call.
Campaigns deepseek_autoresearch_linux_none_s1–s4, all 120 trials: coding agent
fails to produce a valid patch on the LM pretraining task without memory context;
worker exits non-zero; provenance IDs complete in all 120 records.
OpenML nodes reject hyperparameter values outside their bounded configuration domains, e.g. excessive tree depth or estimator counts. The run emits a machine-readable
invalid_config label, which the control plane records as failed_invalid.
Occurs when a run completes (exit zero) but the log file contains no parseable metric line,
e.g. a training script that writes to stderr only or silently skips the validation epoch.
Decision is failed_invalid; the raw log ref is retained for inspection.
ClawWorker only: the coding agent produces a patch file but fails to apply it cleanly
(merge conflict, syntax error introduced by the patch). This is a worker-path artifact; it
does not appear in LocalWorker or LangGraph deterministic-patch campaigns.

degraded_metric

Post-run

Decision rule

{"trial_id":
"deepseek_autoresearch_linux_none_s1-trial-001",
"campaign_id": "deepseek_autoresearch_linux_none_s1",
"budget_index": 1,
"decision": "failed_invalid",
"failure_category": "runtime_error",
"proposal_summary": "reduce-embedding-lr-0.01",
"parsed_metrics": null}

All 120 trials in the none-memory arm of the autoresearch-linux
node share this pattern: the coding worker fails to produce a valid
patch without memory context, exits non-zero, and the control
plane records runtime_error.
invalid_config
(campaign deepseek_openml_bm_s2, trial-005):
{"trial_id":
"deepseek_openml_bm_s2-trial-005",
"campaign_id": "deepseek_openml_bm_s2",
"budget_index": 5,
"decision": "failed_invalid",
"failure_category": "invalid_config",
"proposal_summary": "increase-n-estimators-700",
"parsed_metrics": null}

The invalid_config category covers node-level constraint violations where the edited file is in scope but the proposed value is
outside the NodeSpec’s bounded domain. It appears in the primary
OpenML evidence set and is therefore included in the main-paper
taxonomy.

E.2

Taxonomy Reliability Probe

To check that failure categories are structurally assignable from
observable ledger evidence, we applied an independent rule-based
relabeler to a stratified sample of 50 failed_invalid records
spanning the observed validation categories. The relabeler uses
only scope-validation flags, patch presence, training-initiation signals, and execution status — never the failure_category field

Not failed_invalid: valid run, metric parses, but does not beat current best. Decision
is discarded. E.g. campaign kdd_resnet_scientific_20, trial-002: patch runs successfully, val_auc = 0.7738 vs. current best 0.7747; trial is discarded with full artifact retention.

itself. Cohen’s 𝜅 between the control-plane assignments and the
structural relabeler is 𝜅 = 0.830 (95 % CI [0.703, 0.958]), Landis–
Koch “almost perfect” agreement. This is a structural agreement
check, not a human inter-rater study. Perfect agreement (𝜅 =
1.0) is achieved for invalid_config, invalid_edit_scope, and
proposal_precondition_failed; the six discordant cases are
runtime_error and no_op_patch edge cases where the distinguishing evidence (training seed, no-op message) is absent from
the JSONL record but present in the referenced artifact files. Full
human inter-rater validation remains future work.

E.3

Distinguishing Failed from Discarded

Key design choice: valid non-improving trials are discarded, not
failed_invalid. This matters for audit:
• failed_invalid: a process problem (scope violation, coding failure, missing output) the operator should inspect.
• discarded trials indicate a valid experiment that did not
improve the metric — a normal outcome in exploration campaigns with high discard rates.
Treating discard as failure would inflate the invalid rate and make
it impossible to distinguish bad proposals from bad outcomes.

E.4

New Category Protocol

To add a new failure category:
(1) Add the enum label to FailureCategory in memory/schemas.py.
(2) Add detection logic in control_plane/campaign.py at the
appropriate guard or post-run classification point.
(3) Add the name to failure_categories in the NodeSpec YAML(s).
(4) Add a test in tests/test_trial_schema.py.
The new category must map to kept, discarded, or failed_invalid
before the ledger append.

