Trustworthy LLM-Based Rule Learning for Auditable Agentic
Decision-Making
Jie Zhou

Zhenyu Zhang

Ted Sandler

Amazon
Seattle, WA, USA
jiezhoua@amazon.com

Amazon
Seattle, WA, USA
zhenyuzh@amazon.com

Amazon
Seattle, WA, USA
sandler@amazon.com

Xiaolong Kuang

Xinyang Sheng

Ozalp Ozer

Amazon
Seattle, WA, USA
xkkuang@amazon.com

Amazon
Seattle, WA, USA
xinyans@amazon.com

Amazon
Seattle, WA, USA
ozalpo@amazon.com

ABSTRACT
Deploying LLM-based agentic systems in high-stakes operational
settings requires achieving trustworthiness, explainability, consistency, and adaptability simultaneously. Existing approaches such as
manual expert audit, supervised classifiers, or hard-coded rule systems struggle to achieve them within a unified framework. In this
paper, we introduce a LLM-based rule learning framework comprising three modules: (1) an error-driven rule induction algorithm that
iteratively extracts both explicit and implicit domain knowledge
from limited labeled data via Chain-of-Thought prompting, with a
greedy set-cover-based pruning step to select a minimal, high-utility
rule set; (2) a rule deduction module that generates predictions using specific rules with auditable reasoning traces for each decision;
and (3) a rule generalization module that autonomously infers new
rules from out-of-distribution data. We evaluate the framework on a
real-world record reconciliation task. The system achieves 92% reconciliation accuracy compared to 85% for a hard-coded rule-based
baseline. Ablation studies confirm that the induced rule library acts
as a consistency anchor, improving accuracy from 84% to 92%. The
rule generalization module identifies valid new rules from cases
that can’t be handled by existing rule library in 50% of samples,
demonstrating the system’s adaptability to evolving operational
environment. We discuss evaluation challenges unique to production agentic systems, including sensitivity to data representation,
the trade-off between rule quantity and quality, and strategies for
continuous monitoring under absent ground truth.

KEYWORDS
agentic AI evaluation, LLM trustworthiness, rule induction, humanin-the-loop, distribution shift, explainability
ACM Reference Format:
Jie Zhou, Zhenyu Zhang, Ted Sandler, Xiaolong Kuang, Xinyang Sheng,
and Ozalp Ozer. 2026. Trustworthy LLM-Based Rule Learning for Auditable
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
KDD’26, August 2026, Jeju, Korea
© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/2018/06. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

Agentic Decision-Making. In Proceedings of KDD Workshop on Evaluation
and Trustworthiness of Agentic AI (KDD’26). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
7 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

1

INTRODUCTION

As LLM-based agentic systems are increasingly deployed in production environments for complex decision-making, evaluating their
trustworthiness becomes a critical challenge [1]. Unlike traditional
ML models evaluated on static benchmarks, agentic systems exhibit
stochastic behavior, operate in evolving environments, and must
provide explainable decisions—particularly in high-stakes domains
where errors carry significant financial consequences. The prevalence of domain-specific data further compounds this difficulty,
as the implicit knowledge required to judge correctness is often
scattered across systems.
In practice, several strategies exist for monitoring and evaluating
such systems, each with fundamental limitations. First, domain associates periodically audit decisions to assess system performance.
While reliable, this approach is costly, slow, and does not scale
to the volume of decisions made by production systems. Second,
lightweight classifiers trained on annotated data can automate performance monitoring. However, these models require large-scale
labeled data that is expensive to obtain and need to be retrained
when the underlying data distribution shifts. Third, domain experts
abstract recurring patterns from audit judgements and formalize
them into standard operating procedures (SOPs) or rules that can
be applied systematically. While rule-based systems offer high interpretability and deterministic decisions [3], they are inherently
rigid. They fail on cases that deviate even slightly from predefined
criteria and cannot generalize to unseen cases outside predefined
rules.
To address these, we propose an LLM-based agentic framework
that combines rule induction, deduction, and generalization with
iterative human-in-the-loop rule refinement to achieve accuracy,
explainability and adaptability simultaneously. In the rule induction
stage, the system builds a rule library from limited labeled data,
capturing both explicit rules commonly used in practice and implicit
rules embedded in domain expertise. Since operational patterns
evolve over time, the rule generalization module automatically
infers new rules when encountering data with previously unseen
patterns, addressing the fragility that prior work has identified
in LLM inductive reasoning under distributional noise [5]. In the

KDD’26, August 2026, Jeju, Korea

rule deduction stage, the system applies the learned rules to solve
reasoning problems while providing clear explanations grounded
in specific rules for each decision.
Critically, we frame our contribution not merely as a system
paper, but as an evaluation framework that addresses multiple dimensions of agentic AI trustworthiness:
• Decision accuracy: The LLM generates and verifies rules
over a small annotated set, extracting both explicit and implicit domain knowledge. This reduces the hallucination risk
inherent in prompting approaches that rely solely on the
model’s embedded knowledge, while also eliminating dependence on manually crafted rules that may not be directly
interpretable by the model.
• Explainability: The induced rule library serves as a centralized, human-readable knowledge base that mirrors how
domain experts reason from established guidelines. Rather
than relying on opaque internal representations, the system
grounds each decision in specific rules drawn from this library, providing transparent reasoning traces that can be
audited and verified.
• Robustness to distribution shift: We evaluate the agent’s
ability to generalize to novel patterns/rules through a rule
generalization module, testing whether the system can autonomously identify valid new rules when encountering
previously unseen data distributions.
• Human-in-the-loop governance: We design an iterative
evaluation loop where domain experts validate agent outputs, correct errors, and feed validated labels back into the
system, establishing a continuous monitoring and improvement cycle.
We demonstrate system efficacy on an industrial inventory matching use case where shortage inventory must be reconciled with
surplus inventory to reduce defects. This domain exemplifies the
challenges motivating our work: supervised models trained on
matching labels require frequent retraining, ground truth is expensive to obtain, and model decisions are difficult to interpret
and evaluate. Domain specialists can investigate cases using their
expertise but cannot scale. An agentic system must therefore act
with domain-expert-level knowledge, adapt to new patterns, and
provide auditable explanations for each decision. Our experiments
show that the agentic system achieves 92% reconciliation accuracy
on 4K test cases, outperforming the deterministic baseline of 85%.
Ablation studies reveal that without the rule induction module,
accuracy drops to 84%, confirming that induced rules mitigate the
inherent stochasticity of LLM generation. The rule generalization
module successfully identifies valid new rules from unlabeled data,
demonstrating the system’s adaptability without retraining.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
reviews related work on LLM evaluation and rule learning. Section 3 describes the agentic system architecture. Section 4 presents
the dataset and trustworthiness evaluation across multiple dimensions. Section 5 discusses evaluation challenges and lessons learned.
Finally, Section 6 concludes with future directions for agentic AI
evaluation.

Zhou, et al.

2

RELATED WORK

Evaluation of Agentic AI Systems. As LLM-based agents are deployed in production, evaluation has emerged as a critical research
area. Traditional benchmarks assess static capabilities, but agentic
systems require evaluation of multi-step reasoning, adaptability,
and behavioral consistency over time. Recent work highlights challenges including stochastic agent behavior, absence of ground truth,
and the need for continuous post-deployment monitoring. LLM-asjudge methods have been proposed for scalable evaluation, though
they introduce their own biases. Our work contributes to this space
by proposing an evaluation framework that combines automated
metrics with human-in-the-loop validation for a production agentic
system.
Trustworthiness and Explainability. Trustworthy AI requires
systems that are reliable, fair, robust, and explainable. For LLMbased agents, explainability is particularly challenging due to the
opacity of neural generation. Rule-based explanations offer one
path to interpretability—if the agent can articulate which rules it
applied and why, human auditors can verify its reasoning. Our
framework evaluates explainability through induced rule libraries
that serve as both decision logic and audit trails.
LLM Rule Learning. Recent studies have integrated LLMs with
rule learning to improve reasoning and generalization. [10] integrates LLMs with rule-based systems for interpretable autonomous
driving. [14] leverages LLMs to learn rules from robot trajectories, refine them, and translate to code. [13] explored LLM performance in following predefined rules. [11] leverages LLMs to
infer logic rules from training data for downstream reasoning. [6]
use LLM generalization to generate new detection rules for web
security. The most relevant work is [15] which prompts LLMs to
learn rule libraries for reasoning. However, none of these works
evaluate the trustworthiness dimensions of rule-learning agents—
explainability, robustness to distribution shift, and human-in-theloop governance—which is the focus of our contribution.
In-Context Learning and Chain-of-Thought. LLMs with
hundreds of billions of parameters have demonstrated remarkable
emergent capabilities. [1] introduced in-context learning, where
LLMs generate expected outputs from few examples without gradient updates. Instruction tuning enables generalization to unseen
tasks [7, 8]. Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting [9] prompts LLMs
to reason step-by-step, improving performance on complex tasks.
These capabilities underpin our agentic system’s ability to induce
and apply rules, but also introduce evaluation challenges around
consistency and reliability that we address in this work.

3 METHODS
3.1 System Overview
As shown in Figure 1, the agentic system consists of two main
modules: rule induction and rule deduction. During induction,
Given a small set of human-annotated examples, the LLM generates
candidate rules that explain observed decision patterns, then prunes
redundant or contradictory candidates through verification against
the labeled data. The resulting rule library captures both explicit
criteria and implicit domain knowledge that experts apply intuitively but rarely formalize. During deduction, the agent retrieves
applicable rules from the library, applies them to the input data,

Trustworthy LLM-Based Rule Learning for Auditable Agentic Decision-Making

and produces a prediction along with an explanation trace specifying which rules were triggered and why. When the deduction
module encounters cases that cannot be resolved by existing rules,
the system routes them to a generalization module. Here, the LLM
leverages the existing rule library as context alongside the novel
data to hypothesize new rules. Newly proposed rules are routed to
human validation before integration into the library.

KDD’26, August 2026, Jeju, Korea

The rule induction module extracts structured decision rules from
a small set of curated labeled data, constructing a centralized rule
library that serves as the knowledge base for downstream reasoning.
Our method operates in a low-data regime, making it practical for
domains where labeling is expensive and expert time is scarce. The
induction process follows a two-stage algorithm (Algorithm 1):
iterative rule induction to maximize rule coverage, followed by rule
pruning to eliminate redundancy and retain only high-utility rules.

formulate the rule induction as an iterative hypothesis-and-verify
process. At each iteration 𝑘, the LLM is prompted with Chain-ofThought (CoT) reasoning over the current error set 𝐸 to hypothesize
a batch of candidate rules 𝑅𝑘 that explain the observed label patterns.
The combined rule set 𝑅 ∪ 𝑅𝑘 is applied via the deduction module
(Section 3.3) to predict labels 𝑙ˆ𝑖 for all samples in 𝐸. The error
set is then updated to retain only misclassified samples. Iteration
continues until the error set is empty (𝐸 = ∅) or the maximum
iteration count 𝐾 is reached. Here, 𝐾 is selected based on heuristics
(can be size of induction data 𝑁 ). This error-driven loop is analogous
to boosting in ensemble learning: each iteration focuses the LLM’s
inductive attention on residual errors that prior rules failed to
capture, progressively extracting rules that cover common patterns
first and edge cases later.
The iterative induction process intentionally over-generates
rules to maximize recall over diverse patterns. However, redundant or overlapping rules degrade inference quality for two reasons:
(1) the LLM’s attention mechanism may over-weight repeated instructions at the expense of other critical rules during deduction,
and (2) a bloated rule library increases prompt length and inference
cost without much accuracy gains.
We address this through a greedy set-cover formulation inspired
by the weighted maximum coverage problem [14]. As shown in
Algorithm 2, given the validation set 𝑉 and the candidate rule
library 𝑅 = {𝑅1, . . . , 𝑅𝐾 }, we seek a minimal subset 𝑅 ∗ ⊆ 𝑅 that
maximizes prediction accuracy on 𝑉 . We define the marginal cover
rate of a candidate rule 𝑅𝑖 with respect to the current mislabeled
set 𝑊 as:
Number of mislabeled cases corrected by the rule
Cover Rate =
.
Total number of mislabeled cases
At each iteration, the rule with the highest cover rate is added to
our refined rule library 𝑅 ∗ , and 𝑊 is updated to reflect remaining
errors. This process continues until no additional rules improve
coverage.

Algorithm 1 Two-stage Rule Induction with CoT
1: Require:
𝑁
2: Induction data 𝐼 = {(X𝑖 , 𝑙𝑖 )}𝑖=1
3: Validation data 𝑉 = {(X 𝑗 , 𝑙 𝑗 )}𝑀
𝑗=1
4: Step 1: Iterative Rule Induction
5: Initialize error set 𝐸 = 𝐼
6: 𝑘 = 0, 𝑅 = ∅
7: while 𝐸 ≠ ∅ AND 𝑘 < 𝐾 do
8:
𝑘 =𝑘 +1
9:
Run CoT induction on 𝐸 to induce rules 𝑅𝑘
10:
Perform deduction on 𝐸 to predict label 𝑙ˆ𝑖 using 𝐸 and 𝑅
𝑁
11:
𝐸 = {(X𝑖 , 𝑙𝑖 ) | 𝑙ˆ𝑖 ≠ 𝑙𝑖 }𝑖=1
12:
𝑅 = 𝑅 ∪ 𝑅𝑘
13: end while
14: Step 2: Rule Pruning
15: Apply Algorithm 2 on 𝑅 = {𝑅1 , . . . , 𝑅𝑘 } and 𝑉
16: Select optimal rule set 𝑅 ∗ maximizing accuracy on 𝑉
17: return Optimal rule set 𝑅 ∗

Algorithm 2 Rule Prune Algorithm
1: Require:
2: Sample set 𝑉 = {(X 𝑗 , 𝑙 𝑗 )}𝑀
𝑗=1
3: Rule library 𝑅 = {𝑅1 , ..., 𝑅𝐾 }
4: Initialize optimal rule set 𝑅 ∗ = {𝑅𝑖 with highest accuracy}
5: Initialize cover rate 𝐶𝑅 = 1
6: Initialize mislabeled data 𝑊 = {(X 𝑗 , 𝑙 𝑗 )}𝑀
𝑗=1
7: while 𝐶𝑅 > 0 do
8:
𝑅𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 𝑅 − 𝑅 ∗
9:
for 𝑅𝑖 ∈ 𝑅𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑡 do
10:
Perform deduction on 𝑊 using 𝑅 ∗ ∪ 𝑅𝑖
11:
Calculate cover rate 𝐶𝑅𝑖
12:
end for
13:
Select 𝑅𝑖∗ with highest 𝐶𝑅𝑖∗ = max𝑖 𝐶𝑅𝑖
14:
𝑅 ∗ = 𝑅 ∗ ∪ 𝑅𝑖∗
𝑀
15:
Update 𝑊 = {(X𝑖 , 𝑙𝑖 ) | 𝑙ˆ𝑖 ≠ 𝑙𝑖 }𝑖=1
16: end while
17: return Optimal rule set 𝑅 ∗

In Step 1, given induction data 𝐼 where X𝑖 denotes the attribute
set and 𝑙𝑖 the ground-truth label and the validation data 𝑉 , we

To adapt to emerging new patterns, we introduce a rule generalization module. When the deduction module cannot reach a

Figure 1: Agentic system architecture with evaluation touchpoints

3.2

Rule Induction

KDD’26, August 2026, Jeju, Korea

decision using the existing rule library, the generalization module is
triggered. The LLM is prompted to infer new rules for unlabeled or
limited labeled input data based on the current rule library and highlevel domain knowledge. This design is grounded in two theoretical
observations. First, LLMs encode abstract relational structures that
transfer across tasks and distributions [1, 4] –they learn general
types of relationships rather than specific feature combinations [12],
enabling analogical reasoning over unseen data. Second, grounding
hypothesis generation in an established rule library constrains the
search space, mitigating the hypothesis drift and pattern overfitting
observed in unconstrained LLM inductive reasoning [5]. Newly inferred rules are routed to human experts for validation, preserving
its integrity while allowing the system to evolve with shifting data
distributions.

3.3

Rule Deduction

During the deduction stage, the LLM outputs the predicted label, the
specific rules it applied, and a natural-language reasoning trace behind model decision. Downstream systems consume the prediction
for execution while surfacing the reasoning trace as a stakeholderfacing explanation. From an evaluation standpoint, it enables auditors to verify not just what the agent decided, but why. In practice,
we regularly sample and evaluate model outputs to validate its
decisions. Human validated labels let us update the rule library by
running induction on the expanded labels.

4 EXPERIMENTS
4.1 Data
We evaluate our system on a discrepancy resolution task in industry. Shortage record (expected but missing inventory) and surplus
(unexpected or excess inventory) are logged in the system. Due
to workflow complexity, the true linkage between corresponding
shortage and surplus records is often lost—yet accurate matching is
required both for financial reporting and for providing stakeholderfacing explanations that justify each reconciliation decision.
Currently, domain specialists manually investigate each shortage
case, examining attributes across dozens of surplus candidates to
identify the best match. While reliable, this approach does not scale.
The existing automated evaluation system relies on hard-coded
rules commonly used by domain experts, yet these rules are rigid
with predefined criteria. Therefore, an agentic rule learning and
evaluation system is needed.
We sample 5K inventory discrepancy cases, collecting attributes
for both shortage and surplus records. Each shortage case has approximately 70 candidate surplus matches on average, making the
selection space large and accurate matching non-trivial. We split
the data into induction set (used for rule learning), validation set
(used for rule pruning), and 4K test samples for final evaluation.
For each sample, the shortage and surplus records are described
by the following attribute format:
<shortage> The missing date is XX, missing quantity is XX,
owner is XX, product is XX, etc </Missing>
<surplus> ID 1: the found date is XX and hour is XX,
Found quantity is XX, product is XX, etc </Found>

Ground-truth labels are costly, requiring expert manual investigation by checking various data. We adopt a disagreement-based

Zhou, et al.

annotation strategy: a few-shot LLM and the deterministic rule
baseline are independently applied to all testing samples, and only
cases where the two disagree are routed to domain experts for
annotation. Agreement cases are accepted as pseudo-labels. This
focuses annotation effort on the most ambiguous and informative
instances.

4.2

Evaluation Framework Design

Evaluating an LLM-based agentic system in production requires
addressing challenges absent from traditional ML evaluation. We
organize our evaluation along five dimensions grounded in our experimental design as summarized in Table 1. For accuracy, we measure reconciliation accuracy as the percentage of correct matches
among all reconciled cases. For coverage, we report binary label
recall, i.e., the percentage of reconcilable cases the agent correctly
identifies as reconcilable. For explainability, we manually verify
each induced rule’s validity. For consistency, we conduct ablation
studies comparing rule-guided vs. direct prompting to quantify how
the rule library reduces stochastic variation. For adaptability, we
evaluate new rule identification rate on unseen dataset.
Table 1: Evaluation dimensions, metrics, and methods used
in this work.
Dimension
Accuracy
Coverage
Consistency
Adaptability
Explainability

4.3

Metric
Reconciliation accuracy
Binary label recall
Accuracy with/without rules
New rule identification rate
Rule validity

Method
Comparison with validated labels
Detection of reconcilable cases
Ablation study
Distribution shift test
Expert audit of induced rules

Evaluation Results

Prompting strategy evaluation. In the induction stage, we evaluated standard zero-shot prompting, few-shot prompting, and Chainof-Thought (CoT) prompting on data labeled by hard-coded rulebased baseline. Few-shot achieved comparable performance to standard prompting (84% reconciliation accuracy). CoT prompting adds
a deep analysis module that prompts the LLM to generate internal
reasoning traces before articulating rules. CoT achieved significantly higher reconciliation accuracy (92% vs 84%) and generated
a more complete and precise rule library compared with standard
prompting. Additionally, CoT identified additional rules not identified by standard prompting strategy.
Data representation evaluation. Converting tabular attribute
data into LLM-readable format significantly impacts agent performance. We evaluated three representation strategies—JSON, markdown tables, and textual enumeration—which are widely used in
LLM tabular data applications [2]. Table 2 shows that textual enumeration achieves the highest reconciliation accuracy (78%), outperforming JSON (74%) and markdown (32%). The intuition is that
textual enumeration converts tabular data into a language-like format that LLMs can naturally parse and reason over, consistent with
their pretraining distribution. Further improvements come from
using comparison-based features (checking whether surplus attributes match shortage attributes, improving to 80%) and grouping
candidates by features (improving to 84%).

Trustworthy LLM-Based Rule Learning for Auditable Agentic Decision-Making

Table 2: Reconciliation accuracy across data representation
strategies on the validation dataset.
Data representation
JSON
Markdown
Text enumeration
Text enum + Comparison features
Text enum + Comparison + Grouping

Accuracy
74%
32%
78%
80%
84%

Comparison with deterministic baseline. We performed rule
induction on curated data to build a rule library and ran the deduction module on test data. The baseline is a deterministic rulebased system built by domain experts who manually identified
high-precision reconciliation rules and hard-coded them over the
course of many months. These rules tend to be high-level and often
fail when multiple attributes must be analyzed simultaneously. We
use aforementioned labeling strategy to correct labels from baseline
method and report final evaluation results in Table 3. From the table,
the agentic system achieves 92% overall accuracy vs. 85% for the
deterministic baseline and comparable recall.

KDD’26, August 2026, Jeju, Korea

The agent applies existing rules (quantity match, date match, product match, time proximity) while simultaneously proposing a new
container-matching rule:
<best_found_id>ID 1</best_found_id>
<used_rules>1, 3, 4, 5, 8, 10</used_rules>
<new_rule>When a Found item has the same container as
the Missing item, it should be preferred over
items in different container, especially when other
key attributes match.</new_rule>
<reconciliation_analysis>
...
</reconciliation_analysis>

This output demonstrates three evaluation-relevant properties:
(1) the agent provides a complete reasoning trace that can be audited; (2) it correctly applies existing rules while identifying gaps;
and (3) the proposed new rule is specific and actionable, enabling
human validators to quickly assess its validity.
Evaluating explainability quality. Beyond accuracy metrics,
we evaluated the quality of the agent’s explanations. For each of
the rules in the induced rule library, domain experts verified rule
validity. All CoT-induced rules were confirmed as valid domain
knowledge.

5
Table 3: Evaluation of reconciliation accuracy and binary
label recall: deterministic baseline vs. agentic system.

Size
4,101

Accuracy
Rule-based Agentic
85%
92%

Recall
Rule-based Agentic
100%
98%

Ablation study: evaluating consistency. To validate the necessity of the rule induction module for behavioral consistency, we
conducted an ablation study by removing it entirely and relying
solely on zero/few-shot prompting for direct deduction. Without
the rule library, accuracy drops to 84%. This demonstrates a key evaluation insight: induced rules help eliminate the inherent stochasticity of LLM generation. When using direct few-shot prompting,
LLMs produce inconsistent outputs for similar inputs due to their
probabilistic nature. The rule library acts as a consistency anchor,
ensuring stable reasoning across predictions—a critical property
for trustworthy deployment.
Evaluating robustness to distribution shift. A key trustworthiness requirement is the agent’s ability to handle novel patterns
without retraining. We evaluated this through the rule generalization module on 100 cases from a different data distribution containing a novel feature not present in the training data. The existing
rule library was insufficient for these cases.
The rule generalization module automatically proposed new
reconciliation rules when existing ones didn’t apply. The agent successfully identified a common matching pattern in approximately
50% of cases. This demonstrates that the agent can identify valid
reconciliation patterns even when new features are introduced and
no labeled data is available. To illustrate the agent’s reasoning during rule generalization, we show a representative output below.

DISCUSSION: EVALUATION CHALLENGES
FOR AGENTIC AI

Our experience evaluating this agentic system surfaces several challenges relevant to the broader agentic AI evaluation community:
Absence of ground truth. In production settings, obtaining
ground truth labels is prohibitively expensive. We addressed this
through a disagreement-driven labeling approach: using high- confidence deterministic outputs as pseudo-labels and targeted human
review for cases where the agentic system disagrees with the baseline. This focuses expensive annotation on the most informative
cases. However, this approach introduces a potential bias: we may
underestimate errors on cases where both systems agree incorrectly.
Periodic random audits are necessary to detect such systematic
blind spots.
Stochastic agent behavior. LLMs are inherently probabilistic,
producing different outputs for identical inputs across runs. Our
ablation study quantifies this effect: without the rule library, accuracy drops from 92% to 84%. The rule library serves as a consistency
mechanism, constraining the agent’s reasoning space to produce
stable outputs. This finding has broader implications for agentic
AI evaluation: any evaluation framework must account for output
variance and measure not just mean performance but consistency
across runs.
Sensitivity to input representation. Our data representation
evaluation (Table 2) reveals that the same agent with the same rules
produces dramatically different accuracy depending on how tabular
data is formatted—from 32% (markdown) to 84% (text enumeration
with grouping). This sensitivity is a trustworthiness concern: small
changes in the input pipeline can cause large performance swings.
Evaluation frameworks for agentic systems should include robustness testing across input format variations.
Rule quality vs. rule quantity. The rule pruning algorithm
(Algorithm 2) addresses a counterintuitive finding: more rules do
not always improve performance. Redundant or repetitive rules

KDD’26, August 2026, Jeju, Korea

can degrade accuracy because LLMs’ attention mechanism may
give disproportionate weight to frequently mentioned instructions,
causing it to overlook other important rules. Our pruning algorithm,
framed as a maximum coverage problem, selects a minimal effective
rule set. This suggests that evaluation of rule-learning agents should
assess not just rule validity but also rule set optimality.
Evolving data distributions. Production data distributions
shift over time as new defect patterns emerge. Static evaluation
on fixed test sets cannot capture this. Our rule generalization evaluation provides a methodology for assessing adaptability: hold
out data with novel features and measure whether the agent can
autonomously discover valid rules. In our experiment, the agent
identified valid new rules in 50% of cases from a shifted distribution—
useful but not sufficient for fully autonomous operation, reinforcing
the need for human-in-the-loop governance.
Explainability enables efficient human oversight. The threepart output structure (prediction, rules used, reasoning trace) enables a form of evaluation that is impossible with black-box models:
auditors can identify why the agent made an error, not just that
it erred. In our complex cases, manual review of disagreements
between the agentic system and the baseline system revealed that
many baseline labels were actually incorrect. The agentic system’s
reasoning traces facilitated this review process by providing auditors with the agent’s rationale for each disagreement.
CoT as an evaluation tool. Our comparison of standard vs.
CoT prompting reveals that CoT serves dual purposes: it improves
agent performance (92% vs 84% accuracy) and simultaneously produces richer evaluation artifacts. The reasoning traces generated
during CoT induction expose the agent’s understanding of domain
relationships, enabling qualitative assessment of whether the agent
has correctly internalized domain knowledge.

6

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

In this paper, we present an evaluation framework for an LLM-based
agentic system applied to record reconciliation, addressing multiple
dimensions of trustworthiness: explainability through induced rule
libraries, consistency through rule-constrained generation, robustness to distribution shift through autonomous rule generalization,
and governance through human-in-the-loop iterative refinement.
The agentic system achieves 92% accuracy on 4K test cases while
providing transparent reasoning traces, and demonstrates adaptability to novel patterns without retraining.
Our findings suggest several directions for future work in agentic
AI evaluation:
• Continuous monitoring metrics: Developing real-time
metrics for detecting performance degradation as data distributions evolve, including rule coverage drift and confidence
calibration.
• Scalable human oversight: Designing efficient audit protocols that maximize evaluation coverage while minimizing
expert annotation burden, potentially using LLM-as-judge
methods for preliminary screening.
• Cross-domain generalization: Evaluating whether the
rule induction–deduction–generalization framework transfers to other high-stakes agentic applications (e.g., fraud

Zhou, et al.

detection, compliance monitoring) with similar trustworthiness requirements.
• Behavioral consistency benchmarks: Developing standardized benchmarks for measuring LLM agent consistency
across runs, including sensitivity to prompt variations and
input ordering.

REFERENCES
[1] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan,
Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan,
Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter,
Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin
Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya
Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. ,
25 pages.
[2] Xi Fang, Weijie Xu, Fiona Anting Tan, Ziqing Hu, Jiani Zhang, Yanjun Qi, Srinivasan H. Sengamedu, and Christos Faloutsos. 2024. Large Language Models
(LLMs) on Tabular Data: Prediction, Generation, and Understanding - A Survey. Transactions on Machine Learning Research (2024). https://openreview.net/
forum?id=IZnrCGF9WI
[3] Giovanni De Gasperis and Sante Dino Facchini. 2025. A Comparative Study
of Rule-Based and Data-Driven Approaches in Industrial Monitoring. ArXiv
abs/2509.15848 (2025). https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:281410785
[4] Or Honovich, Uri Shaham, Samuel Bowman, and Omer Levy. 2023. Instruction Induction: From Few Examples to Natural Language Task Descriptions. Association
for Computational Linguistics (2023), 1935–1952.
[5] Chunyang Li, Weiqi Wang, Tianshi Zheng, and Yangqiu Song. 2025. Patterns
Over Principles: The Fragility of Inductive Reasoning in LLMs under Noisy
Observations. (2025), 19608–19626. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2025.findingsacl.1006
[6] Jinghua Liu, Yi Yang, Kai Chen, and Miaoqian Lin. 2025. Generating API Parameter Security Rules with LLM for API Misuse Detection. arxiv (01 2025).
[7] Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela
Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell,
Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Proceedings of
the 36th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (New
Orleans, LA, USA) (NIPS ’22). Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, Article
2011, 15 pages.
[8] Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H. Bach, Lintang Sutawika,
Zaid Alyafeai, Antoine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Teven Le Scao, Arun Raja, Manan
Dey, M Saiful Bari, Canwen Xu, Urmish Thakker, Shanya Sharma, Eliza Szczechla,
Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani, Nihal V. Nayak, Debajyoti Datta, Jonathan
Chang, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo Manica, Sheng Shen, ZhengXin Yong, Harshit Pandey, Michael Mckenna, Rachel Bawden, Thomas Wang,
Trishala Neeraj, Jos Rozen, Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Thibault Fevry,
Jason Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan, Tali Bers, Stella Biderman, Leo Gao, Thomas Wolf,
and Alexander M. Rush. 2022. Multitask Prompted Training Enables Zero-Shot
Task Generalization. In ICLR 2022 - Tenth International Conference on Learning
Representations. Online, Unknown Region. https://inria.hal.science/hal-03540072
[9] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei
Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting
elicits reasoning in large language models. In Proceedings of the 36th International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA)
(NIPS ’22). Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, Article 1800, 14 pages.
[10] Fanzhi Zeng, Siqi Wang, Chuzhao Zhu, and Li Li. 2025. ADRD: LLM-Driven
Autonomous Driving Based on Rule-based Decision Systems. arXiv (2025).
[11] Yudi Zhang, Pei Xiao, Lu Wang, Chaoyun Zhang, Meng Fang, Yali Du, Yevgeniy S. Puzyrev, Randolph Yao, Si Qin, Qingwei Lin, Mykola Pechenizkiy,
Dongmei Zhang, S. Rajmohan, and Qi Zhang. 2025. RuAG: Learned-ruleaugmented Generation for Large Language Models. ICLR abs/2411.03349 (2025).
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:273850253
[12] Denny Zhou, Nathanael Scharli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang,
Dale Schuurmans, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and Ed H. Chi. 2023. Least-toMost Prompting Enables Complex Reasoning in Large Language Models. ICLR
abs/2205.10625 (2023). https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:248986239
[13] Ruiwen Zhou, Wenyue Hua, Liangming Pan, Sitao Cheng, Xiaobao Wu, En Yu, and
William Yang Wang. 2025. RuleArena: A Benchmark for Rule-Guided Reasoning
with LLMs in Real-World Scenarios. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), Wanxiang
Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar (Eds.).
Association for Computational Linguistics, Vienna, Austria, 550–572. https:
//doi.org/10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.27

Trustworthy LLM-Based Rule Learning for Auditable Agentic Decision-Making

[14] Siyu Zhou, Tianyi Zhou, Yijun Yang, Guodong Long, Deheng Ye, Jing Jiang, and
Chengqi Zhang. 2025. WALL-E: World Alignment by Rule Learning Improves
World Model-based LLM Agents. NeurIPS (2025).
[15] Zhaocheng Zhu, Yuan Xue, Xinyun Chen, Denny Zhou, Jian Tang, Dale Schuurmans, and Hanjun Dai. 2024. Large Language Models can Learn Rules. ICLR
(2024). https://openreview.net/forum?id=tAmfM1sORP

A

DATA PREPROCESSING

The data representation comparison and CoT prompting evaluation
are presented in Section 4.2 of the main text. Here we provide
additional examples of the data formats evaluated.
For JSON format, each row of tabular data is represented as a
dictionary:
<shortage>{'attr_1': XX, 'attr_2': XX,
'attr_3': XX, ..., 'attr_n': 'XX',}</shortage>
<surplus>{'id': 1, 'attr_1': XX, 'attr_2': XX,
'attr_3': XX, ..., 'attr_n': XX}</surplus>

For markdown format, the entire table is inserted directly:
Missing table:
| attr_1 | attr_2 | attr_3 | ... | attr_n |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| XX | XX| XX | XX | XX |
Found table:
| attr_1 | attr_2 | attr_3 | ... | attr_n |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| XX | XX | XX| XX | XX | ... | XX |

KDD’26, August 2026, Jeju, Korea

